The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Martyrs' Idyl, and Shorter Poems
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Martyrs' Idyl, and Shorter Poems

Author: Louise Imogen Guiney

Release date: June 20, 2017 [eBook #54947]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Emmy, MFR and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARTYRS' IDYL, AND SHORTER POEMS ***




Produced by Emmy, MFR and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)








                ---------------------------------------
                       This ebook is dedicated to
                                 EMMY
                 friend, colleague, mentor, role model
                 who fell off the planet far too soon.
                ---------------------------------------




  Louise Imogen Guiney.

  A ROADSIDE HARP. 16mo, $1.00.

  THE WHITE SAIL, AND OTHER POEMS. 16mo,
    $1.25.

  SONGS AT THE START. 16mo, $1.00.

  THE MARTYRS’ IDYL, AND SHORTER POEMS.
    16mo, $1.00.

  HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & CO.
  BOSTON AND NEW YORK.




  The Martyrs’ Idyl
  And Shorter Poems

  BY LOUISE IMOGEN GUINEY

  [Illustration]

  BOSTON AND NEW YORK
  HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY

  The Riverside Press, Cambridge
  1899




  COPYRIGHT, 1899, BY LOUISE IMOGEN GUINEY
  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




  THE MARTYRS’ IDYL

  TO KATHARINE AND GILES




CONTENTS


                                        PAGE

  THE MARTYRS’ IDYL                        1

  SHORTER POEMS

  THE SQUALL                              33

  MEMORIAL DAY                            37

  ROMANS IN DORSET                        38

  VALSE JEUNE                             41

  THE CHANTRY                             42

  MONOCHROME                              43

  THE VIGIL IN TYRONE                     44

  “BECAUSE NO MAN HATH HIRED US”          48

  AN OUTDOOR LITANY                       50

  VIRGO GLORIOSA, MATER AMANTISSIMA       52

  FOUR COLLOQUIES                         54

  SANCTUARY                               58

  ORISONS                                 59

  THE INNER FATE: A CHORUS                60

  OF JOAN’S YOUTH                         62

  BY THE TRUNDLE-BED                      63

  THE ACKNOWLEDGMENT                      64

  ARBORICIDE                              65

  CHARISTA MUSING                         67

  THE PERFECT HOUR                        69

  DEO OPTIMO MAXIMO                       70

  IN TIME OF TROUBLE                      71

  AN ESTRAY                               73

  BORDERLANDS                             75

  TO THE OUTBOUND REPUBLIC: MDCCCXCVIII   76

  ODE FOR A MASTER MARINER ASHORE         78

  THE RECRUIT                             81




THE MARTYRS’ IDYL[1]

  [1] The outlines of this story, and much of the dialogue, in
      Scenes II., IV. and V., are taken from the Acta Sanctorum
      and S. Ambrose.


----------------------------------------------------------------------

I

_Sunset. A high rocky pasture above Alexandria. In the year of Our
Lord 304._

Didymus, _a young soldier, enters and throws himself down_.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

  _Didymus._

  THIS mound is sweet to me. All my blood aches,
  Since driven onward like a dark hill-cloud,
  Dizzy with secret lightnings nowhere spent,
  I chase yon happy sun to his bright death,
  Alas, I know not whither: but I know
  I shall not see the myriad shields uphung
  In camp to-night, nor on our cypresses
  Smoke rise and sink in loath blue fountain spray.
  So far, so far I drift from even them
  Who fill one gourd with me, who cheer my heart,
  Who come in, warm and singing, to the tent,
  And miss me who am gone away, I think,
  Forever, though a day; out of their world,
  Though over a few leagues of upland grass!
  Why hast Thou laid on me magic of pain,
  God unrevealèd? Was I drawn from sleep,
  Man’s duty, body’s health, to be mere wind,
  Wind undirected over fallow wastes?
  What wouldst Thou ask of me, no sword of Thine,
  No ark of service? Yet aware of Thee
  I am and shall be. All my thought, outspread,
  Is open unto Thee: a lonely beach
  Where the wide sobbing surf ebbs everywhere,
  And, hard upon each dawn-encolored wave,
  Flutters the wavy line of drying sand
  Back to the verge: the white line, shadow-quick,
  Thrilling there in the dark: an earthen gleam,
  Vain huntress of the sea. Suffer me now
  To follow and attain Thee, fugitive,
  And be my rest, who hast, my whole life long,
  Been mine unrest: implored, immortal Love!

----------------------------------------------------------------------

_A_ Child _enters, with a reed, wearing a wreath of thorns in his
hair_.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

  _The Child._ Soldier, pipe up for me, a herd-boy, glad
  Because his flocks are folded.

  _Didymus._                     Ah, not I!
  My star is withered; I am man no more.
  Sigh after sigh the builder Grief takes up,
  To heighten over me her gradual arch.

  _The Child._ An arch of entrance to a generous garden,
  Where spirits and the moonlit waters are.
  Take comfort!

  _Didymus._    Thou art a strange child, methinks,
  To say that too wise word.

  _The Child._               Remember, then,
  ’Twas breathed to thee at Alexandria,
  In early-dying April’s golden air.

  _Didymus._ Do I lie here, who deemed myself afar?
  I had forgot; I am foolish, lost, bewildered.

  _The Child._ O mine elect: be patient!... Listen now.
  There is an evening anthem in my reed;
  And while the laurels sparkle, and sun-lit,
  The mother-swallow dips into her cave,
  And doves move close along their bridal bough,
  Murmuring sorrow, I will play to thee.

  _Didymus._ I thank thee, boy, for I may fall asleep.

  _The Child._ Rather shalt wake, and from thy doubt be born!
  Lean so, against my knee.

                                      [The Child _plays, a long time_.

                            O Didymus,
  With thy shut eyes, thy youth undedicate,
  Tell me the name of this new pastoral.

  _Didymus_ (_asleep_). He said: “My yoke is sweet, My burden light.”
  O light, O sweet, perchance, as it was said!

  _The Child._ True heart! The hour rounds up; thy wine-press waits;
  And so this music fades: the silver tones
  Thin out, and faintly drip delight, and cease,
  No willing man nor bird hears how. Good-night,
  O soon-made-perfect!


----------------------------------------------------------------------

II

_Night. The same fields._ Didymus _wakes, alone_.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

  _Didymus._           It is black, and chill.
  My little piper’s gone.... How I have dreamed,
  How I have dreamed! Lord, gather quietly
  All wild hearts like mine own into Thy hand.
  Yet on the look of these fresh-kindled stars
  I feed, as if their bright benignant lips
  Betimes had kissed the fever out of me,
  And given to me their seat in warless air,
  Their naked majesty, their poignant calm.
  Not less remote my spirit, not less free,
  After this unimaginable sleep;
  Having changed place, indeed, poor moth that was!
  With vast abiding things: for now are cast
  Old bonds, old ardors, expectation, ease,
  Glory and death, belovèd land and sea.
  Even as walled frost that feels the solar ray,
  Curls up, impermanent, and reels far down
  In long blue films, elfin, processional,
  While the built stones fall to their first grave hue,
  De-silvered: so the awful powers of earth
  Exhale from me who stand the same; for these
  Are vain, these are phantasmal, but not I.
  At last I know myself, and know my need
  As simply as a young child might, who cries
  For honey from his father’s liberal hive.
  I will go down at dawn; I will seek out
  The Christian bishop, who shall lift me up,
  A soul baptized.... Some lanthorn is beyond,
  And moving. Hail, there! Would that I could say,
  “The gods be kind to thee!”

  _A Voice._                  And why not, friend?
  Thou greetest Cratidas, an old sad man,
  On his home-going track.

  _Didymus._               I too would house
  A head as sad as thine: pause but a space;
  I’ll find thee on the road. Now pray thee tell
  Whose farms are these? His little herd-boy passed,
  And spake or sang to me: Oh, if he were
  An angel, or a Greater!

  _Cratidas._             What art thou?

  _Didymus._ One from the camp Nicopolis.

  _Cratidas._                             I ask,
  Leal to the State, or Christian?

  _Didymus._                       In this dark,
  Imperial Diocletian’s telltale dark,
  And even to the sober ears of eld,
  What danger in the word! But now and here,
  Danger I love as if she were my fawn.
  Turn the lamp full this way: I’ll answer thee.
  A true-accounted Christian I am not:
  Afar from them my nurture; but I heard
  How my young mother, long now in her urn,
  Received them: whence aroma of their prayers
  Haunted our dwelling ever. In the wars,
  I have been sick with longing and half-faith,
  Last year and this; that prickle has lived on,
  Till every natural mirth is dead in me.
  In the shunned name of Christ, I know not how,
  Some harvest of mine innermost desire
  Is sown, is springing up. Art satisfied,
  Father who servest Jove?

  _Cratidas._              Accursèd creed!--
  Sir, there my hasty tongue spake for my heart.
  A rebel girl I loved forsook me late,
  Bit with the Galilean pestilence.
  It rages, and it rots our best: be warned.
  I am no spy; I will befriend thee. Come.

  _Didymus._ Thou livest nigh?

  _Cratidas._ Not far. Where yon sole gem
  Swings from the new moon’s girdle, is my hearth,
  ’Twixt grove and grove: a solitary place,
  Since Theodora went. Hark!...

  _Didymus._                    Sound of horror!
  The city’s anger must be under it.

  _Cratidas._ Ah me, I tremble: my poor lamb’s the cause
  Of such blind fury. Bitter, is it not,
  That her last kinsman, hearing, cannot help her?

  _Didymus._ Cratidas, I would help! Read possible aid
  In this firm-sinewed arm. Speak.

  _Cratidas._                      That I do,
  As unto a well-wisher. I distrust
  Our fickle and tempestuous populace,
  Greek, Roman, Jew, Egyptian, multiform.
  Ah, the uproar! I had not thought to find it
  So fierce, so soon.

  _Didymus._          Speak quickly!

  _Cratidas._                        Loose my wrist.
  Many light things are heavy to the old:
  Therefore, let me not feel thy touch again,
  The while I talk, and guide across the dew.--
  I, weeping in the hall, some three days since,
  Saw Theodora tried. Aloft he sat,
  Eustratius Proculus: no steely man,
  But wise and gracious, in the prefect’s chair.
  I do not blame him. (Mark the sudden gaps
  Along our path.) Eustratius Proculus,
  The gold and purple fringing his white robe,
  In a domed chamber, on a curving throne;
  And next the lighted jasper altar, wheeled
  Far up the floor, boxed incense piled thereby,
  Tall Theodora, like the lotus-flower
  That rides a flooded stream; lictors and priests,
  Notaries, naked executioners,
  Ranged thick about. The prefect so began:
  “Proclaim thyself.” “A maid named Theodora,
  Ward of her aged cousin, Cratidas.”
  “What is thine age?” “They tell me, seventeen years.”
  “And thy condition?” Whereto she replied:
  “Christ’s.” Very patiently he asked:
  “Art bond or free?” as runs the rote of law.
  She smiled in answering: “Free: made free by Christ;
  Else, of free parents honorably born,
  Rhoxis and Heräis, who both are dead.”
  “Then why unmarried?” “For Christ’s sake,” she said,
  “I have been busied with the things of Christ:”
  (For none could quench that hectic “Christ” in her,
  Poor fool!) Then spake Eustratius Proculus:
  “Our code imperial deals with virgins thus:
  Either unto the gods they sacrifice,
  Or in an infamous place shall be exposed.
  Come: one small grain within the brazier dropped,
  And thou dost forfeit all pollution so,
  Nor lose thy burial-rites.” She, blanching not,
  Looked up. “Thou art not ignorant, nor I,
  How man’s coöperate or revolted will
  Doth color, in the councils of high Heaven,
  Both what we do, and suffer. Violence,
  Though sent to seek my soul, shall by her gate
  Sit pilgrim-meek. Christ keeps His citadel.”
  The prefect bent again, compassionate:
  “O girl! rememberest not thy sires august?
  Pity thy beauty, heirloom of their house,
  And precious most in thee. Choose to obey;
  Since even thee my duty cannot spare.”
  But she: “The nail-pierced Hands that have my vow,
  Defend it.” “Save thyself,” he cried, “and trust
  No crucifièd ghost. From foul disgrace
  Snatch thine own youth.” And she: “Behold, I do.
  Christ is my source of honor, and mine end:
  Christ shall be my preserver.” Next I heard:
  “Buffet her twice.” Then: “Wilt thou sacrifice?”
  My Theodora of the reddened cheek
  Seemed absent from the body for a space,
  Before she uttered: “No.” “Child, I am grieved
  For such affront, which all our city sees.
  Thy quality invites another usage,
  Wert thou not crazed.” He paused, being full of ruth;
  But self-relentless, she in that same pause
  Brake forth: “O my one Wisdom, O my Joy!”
  And last, Eustratius Proculus rose up:
  “The edict! Let it work. I dally not,
  For loyal and immovable regard
  Unto mine Emperor.” “Bid me stand as true,”
  She murmured, “in allegiance to a Power,
  Before whom sceptred Diocletian shines
  Brief as this puffing coal.” “Ai, blasphemy!”
  The vast crowd thundered. So they led her down
  Into a three days’ torture in the prison;
  And to the draped tribunal, all unchanged,
  This eve she came. Said I, indeed, unchanged?
  Her spirit and speech were that; her body swayed
  Hither and thither: a candle in a draught.
  Some scrupled naught to praise such blithe disdain,
  Immaculate, illumined; who e’er knew
  Disdain could wear a look so like to Love’s?
  And thrice Eustratius Proculus read out
  Sentence, whereby the virgin Theodora,
  A Christian obdurate and impious,
  Must die indeed, but first must be immured,
  Until the day break, in the house of shame.
  He ended: “May thy God for thee achieve
  The best He can!” She added: “Ay, He will.
  As Daniel from the lions, from the deeps
  Jonah; from furnace-heats the unbought three;
  Peter from dungeon chains; as yesterday
  Our Agnes from the Roman ignominy,
  Shall I be rescued: He is faithful yet.”
  Softly she prayed: “Lord, Lord! deliver straight
  Thy bounden servant, overshadowing
  Thine own, in dread mid-battle, with Thy wing.
  Out of Thy mercy, let them harm me not:
  By thy most bitter Passion borne for man,
  O Fount of chastity, O Fortitude
  Of all Thy saints, Jesu! remember me.”
  Thus, in that voice which I shall hear no more.
  I turned away, dragging my leaden limbs
  Hillward, and homeward.

  _Didymus._              And these shouts, these shouts,
  Incessant, brutal, terrible, they mean--

  _Cratidas._  That now the lictors drive her forth; they mean
  Quick menace to a never-soilèd blossom
  Of Hellas come, and her heroic seed.
  Ah, well: she will recant; she must recant.--
  My young hound bays her welcome. Enter, sir.--
  What! Gone? An armored man swooped like a hawk
  Down the sheer ledges to the city’s core?
  Beware, my fiery nameless half-a-Christian,
  Hot for romance, beneath the stars of spring!
  Well, well, well, well! Down, Demo. I believe
  He’ll somehow free her: we shall have her back,
  Good Demo.... Tut! of all the wild hawk-swoops!


----------------------------------------------------------------------

III

_Midnight. A brothel._ Theodora _alone_. Didymus _breaks in_.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

  _Didymus._ Grant me forgiveness, lady Theodora!
  And fear not. I have spent my breath of life,
  Beating the human hurricane outside,
  To reach thee first of any. Piteous thing,
  Flutter not to and fro; thy net is cut:
  No carrion crow shall ever prey on thee,
  White dove! The evil room’s alive with light,
  Thy light shed out; nor am I longer dark,
  Who see, feel, bathe in it. Oh, what a stream,
  Full from within, as through a lattice door,
  Widens around thee in an aureole;
  From lifted eyes, loose hair, and hands unlocked,
  Gushes the even glory! While I look,
  So bright, thou seraph of the golden blood,
  Rains that pure fire on me, that now I know
  Of what clear essence thou, not less am I;
  Yea, I with thee, and all my thoughts with thine,
  Run up before our God in one straight flame.
  Child, I am here to help thee: Didymus,
  A Cappadocian.

  _Theodora._    Heaven be thanked, and thou,
  For I believe thee! Cappadocia:
  Was it not there the blessed Dorothy
  Brought apples to her lover, after death,
  In token of the riches of that orchard
  Where Christ walks with His own? Let us go thither.

  _Didymus._ Ah, muse no more.

  _Theodora._                 The Lord abide with thee!

  _Didymus._ Though unto me thy voice be like the foam
  Upon a wave of quiet, thy delay
  Dearer than wine of roses, rouse thee: haste!
  How else can I the pact maintain with Him
  Who bade me loose thee from the snare? Come nigh:
  Doff thine apparel; put mine armor on.
  Think but of flight, and safety.

  _Theodora._                      Wingèd one,
  Best brother, brighter than a star, and stronger,
  Uphold me!

  _Didymus._ Bind thy locks. Alas, I am
  No angel sent of Christ, nor yet a Christian.

  _Theodora._ Why dwell in lowland shadow? Thou, ere long,
  Must drink of grace divine the deathless light.
  On, happy soul: for there are hills to climb,
  E’en Calvary hill.

  _Didymus._         Art thou not vested yet?
  The minutes seethe and rush. Oh, had I time,
  I’d tell thee of my pangs: how it has been
  From march to march with me; how vehemently
  The sluices brake in this tormented heart,
  Last night, ten lives ago; how on yon heights
  A boy, (not sweeter Hyacinthus was,)
  Having a pensive garland of green thorns
  Intrailed among his auburn curls, came by,
  And with his new-cut reed, and myrrhy lip,
  Entranced me into slumber; how I saw
  Thy foster-father, and walked on with him,
  And heard thy sacred story: thence I sprang
  Into this hell, where I for thee shall answer.
  And do thou plead with Christ, for me His thrall.

  _Theodora._ The thong: pray knot it! Gentle Didymus,
  Here is my robe: the stuff is torn; the stains
  Began ’neath sharpened spikes, the hooks, the rack.

  _Didymus._ For dress of mine, good in the foray once,
  That keeps thee and a holy dream intact,
  Thou giv’st me this, strangely to make of me
  The athlete of thy Lord. Well, give it so:
  I kiss each dear and venerable stain,
  And lay the rended linen over me:
  Would I were worthier!

  _Theodora._            Cratidas the fond
  Has somehow faded from me, and our roof
  Among the date-palms, and my dial old,
  Set in the myrtle plot that takes the sun.
  But thou art close and real: thou hast seen
  The Mystical, the Virgin-born: his name
  Not Hyacinthus, but Emmanuel.
  (Much have I startled thee, who art so brave!)
  None shared with me that vision until now.
  It was to Him I pledged my early troth,
  Towards whom I live, for whom I look to die;
  Whose love was sovereign healing unto me,
  When late within the torture-cell I lay.
  His chosen other, kneel not thou to me!
  There is a Hand that will not let thine fall,
  As mine doth.

  _Didymus._    Sign me slowly with the cross.

  _Theodora._ So: on predestined brows.

  _Didymus_ (_after a pause_).      Thy sandal’s fast,
  The breastplate firm and fine, each joint in place;
  Draw low the vizor; let the short cloak hang;
  And stoop in issuing forth: step hurriedly,
  As one ashamed, whom his loud sins pursue.
  Go thus, secure.

  _Theodora._      Thou shalt not always hunger!
  O thy requital: might I see it!

  _Didymus._                        Go:
  Go, even as I said.

  _Theodora._         I am so weak:
  What if I cannot?

  _Didymus._        Hush: unbar the door,
  And front the pack.--My sister, my twin-born,
  Live thy sequestered life; and pray for me.

                                                     [Theodora _goes_.

  Ah, gracer of our Roman mail! I hear
  No smallest rumor that her passage makes,
  Not one least vicious snarl or jeer the more.
  I dare to dream Thou hast accepted this,
  My true task in the world! By now, I think,
  She leaves behind the fetid neighborhood;
  A moment more, and her accustomed feet
  Will be among the vineyards and the folds.
  The little weary feet wounded for Thee,
  Do Thou sustain!... They come.


----------------------------------------------------------------------

IV

_Midnight. The city square outside._ Didymus _in the arched doorway
of the same house. A turbulent crowd around._

----------------------------------------------------------------------

  _The Bailiff._                 Give way, give way!
  Order among ye, subjects, citizens;
  Order, I say! A seaman, in this dark,
  Would swear he heard the angry equinox
  Gorging and emptying the island caves:
  A swash of death, where he had hoped for haven.
  Whence the commotion, that, from well-earned beds
  Untimely drags your rulers? Ibrahim,
  Or Rufus, any of you with unslit tongue,
  Speak!

  _A Voice._ At me that am terror-struck they laugh,
  Who was the first to find him: Come, mock not
  Too easily, but measure what I saw!
  I heard, and ye too heard, in likelihood,
  What I called fable, that this Christian God
  Changed water into wine; yet in night’s eye,
  A slim maid that was shut ’twixt four known walls,
  Your Christian God turns to a brawny youth,
  Whom seven men and myself barely haled hither.

  _Didymus._ Murmur not, wonder not: ye are broad awake.
  No trick hath been, nor am I one transformed.
  Whom late ye thought to have, lo, ye have lost;
  And whom ye have unwitting, ye may keep.
  There is a twofold glory on the hour:
  A virgin is a virgin still, and I,
  The empire’s soldier, champion of her King.

  _A Voice._ A generous comedy!

  _Another Voice._              Dost applaud it? Ay?

  _The Crowd._ See him in the doorway, yellow-gowned;
  See the young beauty in his flower! O Pan!

  _The Bailiff._ Among these loud boors press your torches in.
  Back! Let the prefect pass.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Eustratius Proculus _is borne into the square_.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

  _A Voice._                  Now shall we view
  The snorting tiger-dam at bay, the while
  The cub’s concealed.

  _The Prefect._       Be silent! Clear with rods
  The threshold of that house: the accused alone
  Shall stand there. Hither and together call
  The trumpeters, for I this cause arraign
  In open air.

                                                [_The trumpets sound._

               Who so disturbs the streets,
  With the grave ends of justice interferes,
  And draws contempt on me? What roysterer,
  What prince of Alexandria’s worst?

  _Didymus._                         I think
  It must be Christ Himself, or Christ in me,
  Since in His quarrel I stand ambushed thus.

  _The Prefect._ His talk is echo.

  _The Bailiff._                   Learned of lady-love!
  Dull matter all: sheep filing over bars,
  One hobble without end.

  _A Voice._              Thy Theodora--

  _Didymus._ Revere that name; for she is Christ’s alone,
  Not mine, not mine. Whithersoever goes
  The Lamb in Heaven, such do follow Him.

  _The Prefect._ Enough: with quick straightforward words respond.
  Who art thou, chief in this unseemly brawl?

  _Didymus._ One new to camp and city, one indeed
  No alien, but your servant in the wars,
  Beneath the imperial eagles now three years:
  Octavius Didymus, centurion.

  _The Prefect._ A Roman, then. What of thy friend, the woman,
  Duly condemned for heinous sacrilege?

  _Didymus._ The innocent Theodora is set free.
  In as a thief came I who gave such good,
  But never greeted her, nor saw, nor heard,
  Up to our late accost in this vile pen.

  _A Voice._ How now, neighbors? A joker.

  _Another Voice._                      Or a liar.

  _The Crowd._ More like, a fellow-Christian.

  _Didymus._                      Why a Christian?

  _The Prefect._ If not a Christian, it rejoiceth me,
  Aweary grown of all the casuist breed.
  I deem thou art sincere. The charge is light;
  The penalty shall therefore too be light,
  Since thou thyself of prior circumstance
  Wert plainly unaware; and forasmuch
  In thy regard, our judged idolatress
  Was one with any whimsied wench, cajoling
  A frolic hand to let her out o’ doors.

  _Didymus._ Let us not fail in truth: sir, I knew this.
  My soul’s defiance glowed in all I wrought.

  _A Voice._ By Pompey’s certain pillar, he’s a Christian!
  The prancing gesture, see: the head upcast,
  The bosom all in a white wrath, and yet
  Bridled and bitted: that’s their duplex way.

  _The Prefect._ I hesitate.

  _The Crowd._               Eustratius Proculus,
  We take him for a Christian!

  _The Prefect._               Prisoner,
  Attend, and ease our cares. Obediently
  Unto the known gods wilt thou sacrifice?

                                                 [Didymus _is silent_.

  Art thou a Christian: nay?

  _Didymus._                 Tell me.

  _The Prefect._                      Alas,
  Why loath to sacrifice? Do thou but so,
  Irreverence to the law shall be condoned,
  And for the brave adventure of a night,
  No tax be laid.

  _Didymus._       I sacrifice no more.
  Who hath inspired me? I can but attest
  One Infinite loved her for her confident eyes.
  Would we were open to the heart of things!
  For if He keeps without spot, as some say,
  Those leal to Him, is it not wonderful?
  And Him thus fair reputed, Him untried,
  Shall I reject? I sacrifice no more,
  Save to the Living: save to Him who died,
  And rose again.

  _The Bailiff._  Ye hear.

  _A Voice._               A leprous word!

  _The Prefect._ It is a difficult hour: I must comport
  Myself within mine office, steadfastly.
  Bring me the writ. One act is mine to do:
  Another time for fond alternatives!
  Though fain to spare, fain to respect in thee,
  Arms, broadening empire, and invincible Rome,
  I that would never, fighting civic harm,
  See Diocletian fail, nor have it said
  Great Decius and Valerian failed before,
  Rise to the common weal, and so bar out
  Contagion from our long inviolate air.

  _Didymus._ I feel the little lovely kiss of death
  Breathe at my temples, softer than a bride.

  _The Prefect._ Octavius Didymus, bound in triple cords,
  Shall be at sunrise, on the appointed plain,
  Beheaded. Gracious Cæsar, hail! all hail!

  _The Crowd._ Hail, Cæsar!

  _Didymus._ These have made me Thine, O Christ!

  _The Prefect._ Reflect: I can revoke, I would revoke.
  Name but thy young confederate’s hiding-place.

  _Didymus._ I know not, sir, where Theodora is.
  She passed: and I remain.... Demonic laughter!
  I would I had said less: it saddens me.
  In all this swarm, there figures verily
  Not one that will believe; not one kind soul
  But is so sodden with the slime of life,
  (Life pagan, and without our Star,) that he
  Must read awry, and slander my fair deed.
  Ah, if they knew: but wherefore should they know?
  Lord, fold amid the leafage of my heart
  Her lilied memory! I will strive no more;
  But turn to Thee, away from time and tears,
  A melting snowflake in Thy mercy’s sea.

  _The Prefect._ Disperse.

                                                [_The trumpets sound._

  _A Voice._               Our novel damsel, fallen dumb,
  On the good public flint shall soon strike fire;
  And we may trap that masking man-at-arms,
  Before a lizard gets his inch of sun.
  Ho, ho! Away: lead on!

  _The Crowd._           Huzza! huzza!


----------------------------------------------------------------------

V

_Dawn. The place of execution, west of the city, looking seaward.
The same crowd, leading_ Didymus.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

  _A Voice._ A long march is well ended. How fares he?

  _The Bailiff._ He thrives; I hear him murmuring idle spells.

  _Didymus._ Soft is the twilight breeze, soaked full of sea.
  The veiled isle yonder rears her breathing lamp;
  And under us, in hollows of the crags,
  Each washing wave goes like a gentle gong.
  Across the hills, there brims a lucent tide,
  Inaudible, yet lovelier; living gray
  Ridges the pulsing east, a surf of light;
  And doubling ever on itself, a glow
  Now near, now far, breaks up the crested sky,
  As children, pink against the green sea-garden,
  Play in the earthly waters, unafraid,
  And ruddier than all roses, race ashore.
  So come, so come, gracile and glorious,
  O rose unborn, my Day!

  _The Bailiff._         We’ll halt awhile,
  And shortly see our way to honest work....
  Listen! Do others follow us, or no?
  It seemed our concourse emptied all the town.
  Who stirs through this dim weather?

----------------------------------------------------------------------

_A slave rushes in._

----------------------------------------------------------------------

  _A Slave._                          Theodora!
  They are bringing Theodora here to die.

  _The Crowd._ Victory!

  _Didymus._ Lord my God, what hast Thou wrought?
  I tremble with the sorrow and the joy.
  The shouts, the trampling feet, renew for me
  A sacrifice I thought to make no more.

  _The Bailiff._ Drag her yet nigher.

  _The Crowd._                        She is welcome!

  _A Woman._                                          See:
  Her knees are white; the gold hair brushes them;
  The glimmering breastplate, in the breaking dark,
  Shows comely.

  _A Voice._    Take it off!

  _Theodora._                Not so; not yet.

  _The Bailiff._ Then tell thine own night’s tale: there’s privilege.

  _Theodora._ A simplest tale. When dedicated hands
  Gave me this dress, lest I should suffer wrong,
  The strong disguise bred courage; but I went
  Only a mile: the armor was too heavy.
  Where blossomed almonds shade the roadside well,
  Did I fall down, aswoon; I think I swooned
  For long; and some late revelers, passing by,
  Found me, and with a tumult took me hither.
  Fulfill your will in pity; I would rest.

  _The Bailiff._ Half of the warrant drawn for Didymus,
  Is yet to read: thy fate and his are one.

  _Theodora._ On Didymus? Most miserable I,
  If he must suffer, being kind to me!
  What have ye done with Didymus?

  _Didymus._                      I am nigh.

  _Voices._ Look: they have run together! Miscreants!

  _Theodora._ O strange ordaining! Tell me: by what right
  Art thou encountered on the fatal ground?

  _Didymus._ By right more fair than thine, because, forsooth,
  Not punished for thy planned deliverance,
  But rather for the sacred Name, I stand
  Thus ready to the headsman. Aye: give thanks;
  Yet thou, too rash, hast clouded my last hour.
  Did I not guard thee? Was my prayer in vain?
  For into horror’s mouth thou hast returned.

  _Theodora._ Nay: chide not. Test their changed intent, and mark
  That in it lurks for me no word but “Death,”
  No word at all but dear dispassionate “Death.”
  Were I, still helpless, in dread peril caught,
  To thy releasing hand I still had cried,
  Who could not yield mine honor up; but this,
  The debt of life, I can myself discharge.
  And if I die not so for Christ, to-morrow
  Will these be angered less with me? and then
  For taking flight, for guiltiness of thy guilt,
  My helper, shall I not less nobly die?
  Was it from martyrdom erewhile I ran,
  Or only from the maw of wickedness?
  And lightly I relinquished unto thee
  My girlish raiment, not my soul and self:
  My fond profession of the Christian name.
  Would he deprive me now of my last due,
  Greatly deceives me one I thought my friend!
  What will become of me if thou shouldst go,
  Alone? That cruel hour would strike away
  My second sentence, glad, desirable,
  And lower me to the insupportable first.
  Leave me not to the torment; rather share
  The blessedness; be jealous even for me!
  Let it forevermore of thee be told
  How from the thousand hands of a brute foe
  Thou savedst once the spouse of Christ for Him.
  Ah, Didymus, Didymus! of the eternal crown
  Rob me not thou: for thine to thee I gave.

  _Didymus._ Thy sovereign pinion overmasters harm,
  Life, Death, and me: and if I feared, I erred.
  We shall not be divided: and therefore
  Blessèd be One who hath despised me not,
  And, of His clemency, absolved from ill
  His handmaid Theodora.

  _Theodora._            Blessèd He,
  Towards only children twain, most merciful
  Both in the olden time, and unto us,
  Who so, in triumph, wait our vigil’s close.
  O Light from Heaven, break, break!

  _The Bailiff._                     Attend, all men:
  Heed how to deal with perished Christian swine,
  For much the law doth vary, touching them.
  And since, too oft, their kind do set a watch,
  And, ere the wild beasts from their lairs descend,
  Conceal their bodies elsewhere, ’tis decreed
  That these upon the bordering desert straight,
  Shall, after death, be burned.

  _The Crowd._                   It suits us well.

  _Theodora._ Then not to secret chambers of the rock,
  Our own, with hymnal rite, shall lead us home;
  Not to our natural nest beside the sea,
  Above blown Pharos and the trader’s sail,
  Where, day and night, the Eucharistic Love
  Broods over us, shall thou and I be borne,
  And laid amid our fathers in the Faith,
  Sleep the good sleep of immortality.
  Not one small tress of ours shall reverence save;
  No fragment of our interchangèd garb
  Be shrined forever, nor ascetic lips
  Embrace, in our carved names, the Crucified.
  God’s Will be done, and done with all accord
  In all! and may He grant that unto thee,
  (Who art both more and less than neophyte,)
  Denial of that quiet sepulture
  Be not so keen a pain.--His look’s afar:
  He has not answered.

  _Didymus._           ... Whole on every side!
  Whole, boundless, and immingled: not a chink
  In tremulous textures of this bubbly world,
  Where spirits might slip through. O spacious hour
  Of ocean-distances, air-altitudes,
  Pearl cloudless rounding over waveless pearl:
  Pure Mediterranean! bland Africa!
  Ignoble are the dreams that make of you
  Mere ante-room; and ante-room to--what?
  True to original and terminal earth,
  Rather may royal man, ensphered so fair,
  His chemic end not thanklessly salute,
  When too soon, from our arc of known content,
  We blunder, poor blithe faces, to the Void.
  That spark once fallen, can it live again?
  If poets weep, if just Aurelius
  Evade, if wistful Plato pause unsure,
  Ah, who art Thou that biddest me believe?

  _Theodora._ Encased in thy so serviceable steel,
  Against my bosom, I have kept for thee
  An aromatic and a covered cup.
  Come hither: drain it. Sudden over me,
  While I lay stricken, ere my captors came,
  There bent the childish Shepherd of the hills,
  Austerer than his wont, and uttered low:
  “Wake, Theodora! Bear to Didymus,
  Whom, spent in final battle, thou shalt meet,
  A little draught of mingled wine and dew,
  For baptism, and viaticum.”

  _Didymus._                  I hear.
  A stupor, a temptation, clogged my brain:
  Gone evermore.--What hast thou been to me!
  In any of God’s halls where I may find Him,
  I seek thee also there: O dove! thou knowest
  Thy hidden heavenly way through words withheld.
  I kneel, but cords impede my hands. Pour thou,
  Till I have slaked a supersensual thirst,
  And, faint with salutation, drink to Him,
  Christ Jesu, whom in dying I adore.

  _The Bailiff._ Despatch: broad daylight comes.

  _The Headsman._                                All is prepared.

  _Theodora._ Amen: and Alleluia! Heart flown home,
  If thou wouldst speak, rise up.

  _Didymus._                      Ye worthy men,
  I would not stay you long. Of Didymus,
  Who made his port of intellectual storm
  At Alexandria, tell only this:
  That he for Christ died Christian, with clear joy.
  And when his comrades from their outpost ride,
  And, reining in abreast, ask news of him,
  Lay in their wondering ears, I charge you all,
  That word miraculous, that happy word.

  _A Voice._ I ever knew it. Devil! Sorceress!

  _The Bailiff._ What troubles them?

  _The Crowd._                       The bowl whereof he drank,
  Between her lifted fingers melts away!
  Their magic arts, and them, destroy!

  _The Bailiff._                       The axe:
  Smite first the soldier.

  _Didymus._               Theodora saint,
  How beautiful, how more than banner-bright,
  Streams over the far roofs our birthday sun!
  Farewell, and follow me.

                                               [Didymus _is executed_.

  _The Crowd._        Blood! blood! The other!

  _Theodora._ Each moment of mine exile, so distinct,
  So vast, so bitter, and so ever-during,
  Burns sweet before Our Lord: love’s last slow grain
  Rich as the first: for lo, the censer’s broken;
  And all my soul foreruns her call to climb
  Out of this ruin. Lest I slip, or cry,
  O visible form of light, dear Didymus!
  Turn now: give me thy hand.




SHORTER POEMS




THE SQUALL


  WHILE all was glad,
  It seemed our birch-tree had,
  That August hour, intelligence of death;
  For warningly against the eaves she beat
  Her body old, lamenting, prophesying,
  And the hot breath
  Of startled ferny hollows at her feet
  Spread out: a toneless sighing.

  Across an argent sea,
  Distinct unto the farthest reef and isle,
  The clouds began to be.
  Huge forms ’neath sombre draperies, awhile
  Made slow uncertain rally;
  But as their wills conjoined, and from the north
  The leader shook his lance, O then how fair
  Unvested, they stood forth,
  In diverse armor, plumed majestically,
  Each with his own esquires, a King in air!

  Up moved the dark vanguard,
  With insolent colors that o’erdusked the skies,
  And trailed from beach to beach:
  Massed orange and mould-green; vermilion barred
  On bronze and mottled silver; saffron dyes,
  And purples migratory,
  Fanned each in each,
  As the long column broke, athirst for glory.

  Sudden, the thunder!
  Upon the roofed verandas how it rolled,
  Twice, thrice: a thud and flame of doom that told
  New-fallen, nor far away,
  Some black destruction on the innocent day.
  And little Everard
  Deep in the hammock under, eyes alight
  With healthful fear and wonder
  The brave do ne’er unlearn,
  Clenched his soft hand, and breathing hard,
  Smiled there against his father, like a knight
  Baptized on Cressy field, or Bannockburn.

  A moment gone,
  Into our Thessaly, from Acheron,
  With imperceptive sorcery, crawled ashore
  Odors unnamable: an exhalation
  Of men and ships in oozy graves. (Ah, cease,
  Derisive nereids! cease:
  Be it enough, that even ye can pour,
  From crystal flagons of your ancient peace,
  So strange obscene libation.)
  But with the thunder-peal
  Sprang the pure winds, their thuribles swung wide,
  To chase that tainted tide;
  Fresh from the pastures and the cedar-grove,
  They rode the ridged Atlantic’s copper plain,
  And rent a league of distance to reveal
  A sail, aslant, astrain,
  Impetuous for the cove;
  And tossing after, panic-stricken,
  Another, and a third: white spirits, fain to sicken,
  Nor out of natural harm salvation gain.

  The selfsame hunter winds that drave
  The horror down, as faithful-hearted drew
  The sad clouds from their carnage, and up-piled
  Their rebel gonfalons, or jocund threw
  Their cannon in the wave;
  And subtly, with a parting whisper, gave
  An eve most mild:
  A sunset like a prayer, a world all rose and blue.

  A good world, as it was,
  And as it shall be: clear circumferent space,
  Where punctual yet, for worship of their Cause,
  The stars came thick in choir.
  Sleep had our Everard in her cool embrace,
  Else from his cot he hardly need have stooped
  To see, (and laugh to see!) the headland pine
  Embossed on changing fire:
  For close behind it, cooped
  Within a smallest span,
  In fury, up and down, and round and round,
  The routed leopards of the lightning ran:
  Bright, bright, inside their dungeon-bars, malign
  They ran; and ran till dawn, without a sound.




MEMORIAL DAY


  O DAY of roses and regret,
  Kissing the old graves of our own!
  Not to the slain love’s lovely debt
  Alone;

  But jealous hearts that live and ache
  Remember, and while drums are mute,
  Beneath your banners’ bright outbreak,
  Salute:

  And say for us to lessening ranks
  That keep the memory and the pride,
  On whose thinned hair our tears and thanks
  Abide,

  Who from their saved Republic pass,
  Glad with the Prince of Peace to dwell:
  _Hail, dearest few! and soon, alas,
  Farewell._




ROMANS IN DORSET

TO A. B.


            STUPOR was on the heath,
            And wrath along the sky;
            Space everywhere; beneath
  A flat and treeless wold for us, and darkest noon on high.

            Sullen quiet below,
            But storm in upper air!
            A wind from long ago,
  In mouldy chambers of the cloud, had ripped an arras there,

            And singed the triple gloom,
            And let through, in a flame,
            Crowned faces of old Rome:
  Regnant o’er Rome’s abandoned ground, processional they came.

            Uprisen as any sun
            Through vistas hollow grey,
            Aloft, and one by one,
  In brazen casques the Emperors loomed large, and sank away.

            In ovals of wan light
            Each warrior eye and mouth:
            A pageant brutal bright
  As if, once over, loudly passed Jove’s laughter in the south;

            And dimmer, these among,
            Some cameo’d head aloof,
            With ringlets heavy-hung,
  Like yellow stonecrop comely grown around a castle roof.

            An instant: gusts again,
            And heaven’s impacted wall,
            The hot insistent rain,
  The thunder-shock; and of the Past mirage no more at all.

            No more the alien dream
            Pursuing, as we went,
            With glory’s cursèd gleam:
  Nor sins of Cæsar’s ruined line engulfed us, innocent.

            The vision great and dread
            Corroded; sole in view
            Was empty Egdon spread,
  Her crimson summer weeds ashake in tempest: but we knew

            What Tacitus had borne
            In that wrecked world we saw;
            And what thine heart uptorn,
  My Juvenal! distraught with love of violated Law.




VALSE JEUNE


  ARE there favoring ladies above thee?
    Are there dowries and lands? Do they say
  Seven others are fair? But I love thee:
              _Aultre n’auray!_

  All the sea is a lawn in our county;
    All the morrow, our star of delay.
  I am King: let me live on thy bounty!
              _Aultre n’auray!_

  To the fingers so light and so rosy
    That have pinioned my heart, (welladay!)
  Be a kiss, be a ring with this posy:
              _Aultre n’auray!_




THE CHANTRY


  A LOYAL lady young; a knight for honor slain:
  All beauty and all quiet sealed for aye upon
  Their images that lie in coif and morion.
  A moment since, through rifts and pauses of the rain,
  The day shot in; the lancet window showered again
  Its moth-like play of silver, rose, and sapphire; shone
  What arms of warring duchies glorious, bygone:
  Lombardy, Desmond, Malta, suitored Aquitaine!
  The while aloft in Art’s immortal summer-tide,
  Fair is the carven hostel, fortunate either guest,
  And men of moodier England pass, and hear outside
  Fury of toil alone, and fate’s diurnal storm,
  Hearts with the King of Saints, hearts beating light and warm!
  To these your courage give, that these attain your rest.




MONOCHROME


  SHUT fast again in Beauty’s sheath
    Where ancient forms renew,
  The round world seems above, beneath,
    One wash of faintest blue,

  And air and tide so stilly sweet
    In nameless union lie,
  The little far-off fishing fleet
    Goes drifting up the sky.

  Secure of neither misted coast
    Nor ocean undefined,
  Our saddening sail is like the ghost
    Of one that served mankind,

  Who in the void, as we upon
    This melancholy sea,
  Finds labor and allegiance done,
    And Self begin to be.




THE VIGIL IN TYRONE

TO G. S.


  “TELL it over!” Thus, in twilight, the old gamekeeper of gentle blood,
  To the grandchild teasing, teasing, and pink as the bedtime daisy-bud,

  Tells it over.--“When that happened, I was a boy, and I sat one day
  By the river, in mid-morning, my drowsy cheek to the pleasant clay.

  “Sudden opened, near and under, the believed-in cave on the green
        hillside!
  Thick the darkness, but I saw them: the Earl Hugh’s men that never
        have died,

  “Men gone by, ensainted, fabled, the men unnamed in the living air:
  Like a taper’s flame among them, my soul and body were shaken there.

  “Nine full hundred, nine and ninety, (O’Neil the thousandth when he
        comes back!)
  All a-row, asleep in armor, by horses magical white or black:

  “Mighty horses satin-shouldered, with sheen of the golden stirrups
        grand;
  Mighty troopers drunk with battle, the bridle in every iron hand.

  “Sunburn on their folded faces was fresh as childhood and fierce as
        death.
  Think: the sunburn got in marches against the demon Elizabeth!

  “Next my knee, then, rose a hero, rose up a little, not loosening
        rein;
  Gazing steady, softly said he, and sharply said to me, over again:

  “‘_Is the time come?_’ (That’s for vengeance: the clan is hungry and
        hot to start.)
  ‘_Is the time come, is the time come?_’ Thrice the sound of it
        stabbed my heart.

  “Page or herald if he thought me, the hope that changed like a rushing
        sea,
  Failed and ebbed, and straight outbore him, and took the terror away
        from me;

  “Sands of sleep dragged down his eyelid, and slacked his hand on the
        charger good,
  Surely, heavily, surely, slowly.--I ran till I reached our roof in
        the wood.

  “Long ago. This thing the fathers had whispered of, I beheld and
        heard!
  Though not yet my splendid dreamer the answer win to his uttered word,

  “Patience: that shall be, hereafter. The chief is late, but he seeks
        his own,
  Riding up to break the quiet in all the farm-lands of all Tyrone.

  “They have hid so, they have waited; to hate that smoulders their
        blood is leal.
  O to help them crash around him true Innishowen’s unrusted steel!

  “O to help them cheer and follow O’Neil, O’Neil from his foreign
        grave!
  O to throne thee, saddest, fairest, as once thou wert, on the warless
        wave!

  “Drift of moss for many a summer conceals the door on the charmed
        hillside;
  Clouds and hail of death blow over the Earl Hugh’s men that never
        have died.

  “Nine full hundred, nine and ninety, (O’Neil the thousandth when he
        comes back!)
  Lie a-row, asleep in armor, by horses magical white or black:

  “Mighty horses satin-shouldered, with sheen of the golden stirrups
        grand;
  Mighty troopers ripe for battle, the bridle in every ready hand.

  “‘_Is the time come?_’ (Long the sorrow, little isle, my love, for
        your sake, your sake.)
  ‘_Is the time come? Is the time come?_’ Ah, hush, no more: or my
        heart will break.”

  Pretty Kathie, closer pressing, into that face in silence peers:
  There they fall, the sunset showers, the far-off, idle, eternal tears.




“BECAUSE NO MAN HATH HIRED US”

S. MATT. XX. 7.


I

  TILL I, that am a soldier born, can find
  Some war so worthy, I may pledge it straight
  Unto my dear and virgin sword for mate,
  Who now lies cloistered in her sheath behind,
  Must I ride thus in vain; and on my mind
  The torment and the thirst of glory wait,
  And never cause with zeal inviolate
  Be strong enough my haughty youth to bind.
  Ah, readier men-at-arms! beneath the trees
  Where shepherd-meek, I bear mine altered part,
  And watch the charge far off, and think with awe:
  _I have seen higher, holier things than these,
  And therefore must to these refuse my heart_,[2]--
  That heavenly pride forbids my hand to draw.

  [2] Τὸ καλόν: Arthur Hugh Clough.


II

  Though all your flags sweep stormily in air,
  And thousand hoofs are whirling fiery seed,
  The quiet forest hides my folly, freed
  From good in reach, nor leagued to aught more fair.
  This is my camp of tears, and doubt, and care,
  Where I who long to fight may soothe my greed,
  Full of sad liberty; and if indeed
  The One I lack came hither unaware,--
  If sudden stood beside the saddle-bow
  The Outcast of all time and every land,
  With head drooped like the lily’s parching cup,
  I dare to dream that I my King should know,
  And lean to kiss, within that wounded Hand,
  My only use, my honors, folded up.




AN OUTDOOR LITANY


  THE spur is red upon the briar,
  The sea-kelp whips the wave ashore;
  The wind shakes out the colored fire
  From lamps a-row on the sycamore;
  The tanager, with flitting note,
  Shows to wild heaven his wedding-coat;
  The mink is busy; herds again
  Go hillward in the honeyed rain;
  The midges meet. I cry to Thee
  Whose heart
  Remembers each of these: Thou art
  My God who hast forgotten me.

  Bright from the mast, a scarf unwound,
  The lined gulls in the offing ride;
  Along an edge of marshy ground
  The shad-bush enters like a bride.
  Yon little clouds are washed of care
  That climb the blue New England air,
  And almost merrily withal
  The tree-frog plays at evenfall
  His oboe in a mossy tree.
  So too,
  Am I not Thine? Arise, undo
  This fear Thou hast forgotten me.

  Happy the vernal rout that come
  To their due offices to-day,
  And strange, if in Thy mercy’s sum,
  Excluded man alone decay.
  I ask no triumph, ask no joy,
  Save leave to live, in law’s employ.
  As to a weed, to me but give
  Thy sap! lest aye inoperative
  Here in the Pit my strength shall be:
  And still
  Help me endure the Pit, until
  Thou wilt not have forgotten me.




VIRGO GLORIOSA, MATER AMANTISSIMA


      VINES branching stilly
      Shade the open door,
      In the house of Zion’s Lily,
      Cleanly and poor.
      O brighter than wild laurel
      The Babe bounds in her hand,
      The King, who for apparel
      Hath but a swaddling-band,
  And sees her heavenlier smiling than stars in His command!

      Soon, mystic changes
      Part Him from her breast,
      Yet there awhile He ranges
      Gardens of rest:
      Yea, she the first to ponder
      Our ransom and recall,
      Awhile may rock Him under
      Her young curls’ fall,
  Against that only sinless love-loyal heart of all.

      What shall inure Him
      Unto the deadly dream,
      When the tetrarch shall abjure Him,
      The thief blaspheme,
      And scribe and soldier jostle
      About the shameful Tree,
      And even an Apostle
      Demand to touch and see?--
  But she hath kissed her Flower where the Wounds are to be.




FOUR COLLOQUIES

TO H. P. K.


I. THE SEARCH

  “WHY dost thou hide from these
   Out along the hills halloaing?
   Why hast forbade
   Thy face, O goddess! to thy votaries?”

  “_Unasking and unknowing
   Is he whom I make glad,
   Like Dian grandly going
   To the sleeping shepherd-lad.
   Men that pursue learn not
   To follow is my lot._”

  “Happiness, secret one,
   Heartbeat of the April weather,
   Where art thou found?
   Tell; lest I err too, yonder in the sun.”

  “_Call in thine eye from ether,
   Thy feet from far ground;
   Seek Honor in this heather,
   With austere purples wound.
   Serve her: she will reveal
   Me, hound-like, at thy heel._”


II. FACT AND THE MYSTIC

  “Good-morrow, Symbol.”--“_Call me not
     The name I neither love nor merit._”
     --“That grave eternal name inherit,
   Thine ever, though all men forgot.”

  “_Mistake me not; secure and free,
     From rock to rock my falchion passes:
     But Symbols trail through gray morasses
   The tattered shows of faëry._”

  “My Symbol thou, of phantom blood,
     With starlight from thy temples raying;
     Along thy floated body playing
   Are withering wings, and wings in bud.”

  “_Alas, thine eye with clay is sealed._”
     --“Symbol, before the clay’s denial,
     While yet I had a god’s espial,
   I saw thee in a solar field!”

  “_Nay: I am Fact._”--“Then lose thy praise;
     And lest to-day no song behoove thee,
     Lest mine impeach thee, or reprove thee,
   Ah, Symbol, Symbol! go thy ways.”


III. THE POET’S CHART

  “Where shall I find my light?”

    “_Turn from another’s track:
     Whether for gain or lack,
     Love but thy natal right.
     Cease to follow withal,
     Though on thine up-led feet
     Flakes of the phosphor fall.
     Oracles overheard
     Are never again for thee,
     Nor at a magian’s knee
     Under the hemlock tree,
     Burns the illumining word._”

  “Whence shall I take my law?”

    “_Neither from sires nor sons,
     Nor the delivered ones,
     Holy, invoked with awe.
     Rather, dredge the divine
     Out of thine own poor dust,
     Feebly to speak and shine.
     Schools shall be as they are:
     Be thou truer, and stray
     Alone, intent, and away,
     In a savage wild to obey
     A dim primordial star._”


IV. OF THE GOLDEN AGE

  “Recall for me, recall
   The time more true and ample;
   The world whereon I trample,
   How tortuous and small!
   Behold, I tire of all.

   Once, gods in jeweled mail
   Through greenwood ways invited;
   There now the moon is blighted,
   And mosses long and pale
   On lifeless cedars trail.”

  “_Child, keep this good unrest:
   But give to thine own story
   Simplicity with glory;
   To greatness dispossessed,
   Dominion of thy breast._

   _In abstinence, in pride,
   Thou, who from Folly’s boldest
   Thy sacred eye withholdest,
   Another morn shalt ride
   At Agamemnon’s side._”




SANCTUARY


  HIGH above hate I dwell:
  O storms! farewell.
  Though at my sill your daggered thunders play,
  Lawless and loud to-morrow as to-day,
  To me they sound more small
  Than a young fay’s footfall:
  Soft and far-sunken, forty fathoms low
  In Long Ago,
  And winnowed into silence on that wind
  Which takes wars like a dust, and leaves but love behind.

  Hither Felicity
  Doth climb to me,
  And bank me in with turf and marjoram
  Such as bees lip, or the new-weanèd lamb;
  With golden barberry-wreath,
  And bluets thick beneath;
  One grosbeak, too, mid apple-buds a guest
  With bud-red breast,
  Is singing, singing! All the hells that rage
  Float less than April fog below our hermitage.




ORISONS


    ORANGE and olive and glossed bay-tree,
    And air of the evening out at sea,
    And out at sea, on the steep warm stone,
    A little bare diver poising alone.

    Flushed from the cool of Sicilian waves,
    Flushed as the coral in clean sea-caves,
  “I am!” he cries to his glorying heart,
    And unto he knows not what: “THOU art!”

    He leaps, he shines, he sinks, he is gone:
    He will climb to the golden ledge anon.
    Perfecter rite can none employ,
    When the god of the isle is good to a boy.




THE INNER FATE: A CHORUS


  NOT weak with eld
  The stars beheld
  Proud Persia coming to her doom;
  Not battle-broke, nor tempest-tossed,
  The long luxurious galleys lost
  Their souls at Actium.

  Not outer arts
  Of hostile hearts
  Persuaded him of France to be
  The wreckage of his wars at last,
  The orphan of the kingdoms, cast
  Upon the mothering sea.

  Man evermore doth work his will,
  And evermore the gods are still,
  Applauding him alone who stands
  Too just for heaven-accusing groans,
  And in his house of havoc owns
  The doing of his hands;
  Transgressor, yet divinely taught
  To suffer all, blaspheming naught,
  When fair-begun must foul conclude:
  Himself progenitor of death,
  Who breeds, within, the only breath
  Can kill beatitude.




OF JOAN’S YOUTH


  I WOULD unto my fair restore
  A simple thing:
  The flushing cheek she had before!
  Out-velveting
  No more, no more
  By Severn shore,
  The carmine grape, the moth’s auroral wing.

  Ah, say how winds in flooding grass
  Unmoor the rose;
  Or guileful ways the salmon pass
  To sea, disclose;
  For so, alas,
  With Love, alas,
  With fatal, fatal Love a girlhood goes.




BY THE TRUNDLE-BED

TO M. M. R.


    LOST love, be never beyond Love’s calling!
    For this I claim of you, strong heart, sweet
    As fontal water in Arden falling,
    As first-mown hay in the April heat:

    To tend from heaven, to rear, to harden,
    And bring to bloom in the outer cold,
    Our daffodil bud of a walled-in garden,
    Our son that is like you, and six years old;

    And lest his worth be the worth unreal,
    To ward him not from the mortal blast,
    But suffer your own, through a long ordeal,
    Verily like you to be at the last,

    And hear men murmur, if so he merit
    In your old place with your look to arise:
  “The sign of a saved soul who can inherit?--
    You have earned, O King! those beautiful eyes.”




THE ACKNOWLEDGMENT


  SINCE first I knew it our divine employ
  To beat beyond the reach of soiling care,
  As at Philippi, well of doom aware,
  The Prætor called and heard the singing boy;
  Since first my soul so jealous was of joy,
  That any facile linden-bloom in air,
  Or fall of water on a wildwood stair,
  Annulled for her all dragging dull annoy;
  Though word of thanks I lacked, though, dumb, I smiled
  Long, long, at such august amends up-piled,
  Let this the debt redeem: that when Ye drop
  Death’s aloe-leaf within my honeyed cup,
  On thoughtful knee your much-beholden child,
  Immortals! unto You will drink it up.




ARBORICIDE


  A WORD of grief to me erewhile:
  _We have cut the oak down, in our isle._

  And I said: “Ye have bereaven
  The song-thrush and the bee,
  And the fisher-boy at sea
  Of his sea-mark in the even;
  And gourds of cooling shade, to lie
  Within the sickle’s sound;
  And the old sheep-dog’s loyal eye
  Of sleep on duty’s ground;
  And poets of their tent
  And quiet tenement.
  Ah, impious! who so paid
  Such fatherhood, and made
  Of murmurous immortality a cargo and a trade.”

  For the hewn oak a century fair,
  A wound in earth, an ache in air.

  And I said: “No pillared height
  With a summer daïs over,
  Where a dryad fled her lover
  Through the long arcade of light;
  Nor ’neath Arcturus rolleth more,
  Since the loud leaves are gone,
  Between the shorn cliff and the shore,
  Pan’s organ antiphon.
  Some nameless envy fed
  This blow at grandeur’s head:
  Some breathed reproach o’erdue,
  Degenerate men, ye drew!
  Then, for his too plain heavenliness, our Socrates ye slew.”




CHARISTA MUSING


  MOVELESS, on the marge of a sunny cornfield,
  Rapt in sudden revery while thou standest,
  Like the sheaves, in beautiful Doric yellow
  Clad to the ankle,

  Oft to thee with delicate hasty footstep
  So I steal, and suffer because I find thee
  Inly flown, and only a fallen feather
  Left of my darling.

  Give me back thy wakening breath, thy ringlets
  Fragrant as the vine of the bean in blossom,
  And those eyes of violet dusk and daylight
  Under sea-water,

  Eyes too far away, and too full of longing!
  Yes: and go not heavenward where I lose thee,
  Go not, go not whither I cannot follow,
  Being but earthly.

  Willing swallow poisèd upon my finger,
  Little wild-wing ever from me escaping,
  For the care thou art to me, I thy lover
  Love thee, and fear thee.




THE PERFECT HOUR


  BE it on my blazon shown
  How I fought the fiends alone,
  Ere I rose to this content,
  Open, true, magnificent.

  My heart from the underworld
  Rides the bright sea-foam upcurled;
  My heart suns in air between
  Medlar-pear and nectarine;

  Terrors run to me at dawn
  Tamer than the velvet fawn;
  Not to me hath Love denied
  His great star of eventide.

  Fate, where is thy splintered spear
  Met me in the tourney year?
  Once thou wert in overthrow,
  Then I laughed, and let thee go.

  Wouldst thou yet make sport of me,
  Find me kingly, fervent, free!
  Though there come the foreordained,
  In thy city have I not reigned?




DEO OPTIMO MAXIMO


  ALL else for use, one only for desire;
  Thanksgiving for the good, but thirst for Thee:
  Up from the best, whereof no man need tire,
  Impel thou me.

  Delight is menace, if Thou brood not by,
  Power a quicksand, Fame a gathering jeer.
  Oft as the morn, (though none of earth deny
  These three are dear,)

  Wash me of them, that I may be renewed,
  Nor wall in clay mine agonies and joys:
  O close my hand upon Beatitude!
  Not on her toys.




IN TIME OF TROUBLE


  BELIEVE the word our gentle augur spake:
  _Sweet are the uses of adversity_,
  Sweet ever; and in naught so sweet as this:
  That though the heavens be barred, if we but hold
  An equal, quiet, will-illumined mind,
  Such greatness in us, laborless, must win
  Great answers: cheer from all created things,
  And interchange of love by natural right
  With the high few, a kinship not of clay.
  Be these thy present comfort! Like a man
  Who tends a watchlight on the hills alone
  At Childermas, (and through a night so cold,
  The red clots of the rowan-berry twirl
  Incorporate with a small stiff cone of ice,
  And the wind breaks his flail, and swineherds hear
  Outside, the pine-boles crack with frost i’ the heart,)
  Thou shalt, ere long, upon a distant peak
  Descry a doubted smoke, a likelier spark,
  A shadow shot across a glare, and then
  Two spurts of flame that bare the under sea;
  And climb, by much and more of certitude,
  To praising God some other even as thou
  Beneath his natal star himself maintains,
  And in salute of souls coördinate,
  There, till he perish, guards his lineal fire.




AN ESTRAY


  WELL we know, not ever here is a footing for thy dream:
  Thou art sick for horse and spear beside an Asian stream,

  For the hearth-smoke in the wild, for the goatherd’s stave,
  For a beauty far exiled, a belief within its grave.

  While another sky and ground orb thy strange remembering,
  And no world of mortal bound is the master of thy wing,

  Canst thou yet thy fate forgive, that the godhead in thy breast
  Has this life at least to live as a force in rhythmic rest,

  As a seed that bides the hour of obscureness and decay,
  Being troth of flower to flower down the long dynastic day?

  Child whom elder airs enfold, who hast greatness to maintain
  Where heroic hap of old may return and shine again,

  As too oft across thy heart flits the too familiar light,
  How alarms of love upstart at the token quick and slight!

  Lest captivity be o’er, lest thou glide away, and so
  From our tents of Nevermore strike the trail of Long Ago.




BORDERLANDS


  THROUGH all the evening,
  All the virginal long evening,
  Down the blossomed aisle of April it is dread to walk alone;
  For there the intangible is nigh, the lost is ever-during;
  And who would suffer again beneath a too divine alluring,
  Keen as the ancient drift of sleep on dying faces blown?

  Yet in the valley,
  At a turn of the orchard alley,
  When a wild aroma touched me in the moist and moveless air,
  Like breath indeed from out Thee, or as airy vesture round Thee,
  Then was it I went faintly, for fear I had nearly found Thee,
  O hidden, O perfect, O desired! the first and the final Fair.




TO THE OUTBOUND REPUBLIC: MDCCCXCVIII


  AMERICA, bride of Change!
  Thy cloistral hour is done;
  Thy shy and innocent foot
  Is white on the stranger’s stair:
  Unto what end?--Beloved!
  I have heard thee sigh.

  As the heliotrope in the dusk
  Close under, but unespied,
  Delivers one slow breath,
  Pained, poignant-sweet,
  Into the neutral air,
  Because she inly feels
  At some light shock of a bud
  That would issue forth, and expand,
  How coronals fall, and old
  Dear purples wither away;
  (While the friendly leaves o’erhead
  Moan, and the redwing there
  Aches in his delicate sleep;)
  Even so,
  Freedom’s exempted flower!
  In the rhythm, the interplay
  Of the terrors of budding life
  Or death,
  I have heard thee sigh.

  As the clear mid-channel wave,
  That under a Lammas dawn
  Her orient lanthorn held
  Steady and beautiful,
  Through the trance of the sunken tide,
  Sudden leaps up, and spreads
  Her signal round the sea:
  _Time, time!
  Time to awake; to arm;
  To scale the difficult shore!_
  Even so,
  Thou Heart of the dual deep,
  Ere the plash of the onset came,
  In the vortices
  I have heard thee sigh.

  What if now
  Thou failest, our saint, our star!
  Between thy Father’s tomb,
  And the throne of the glittering world,
  The febrile world,
  Calling,
  Ah, Child! (have I lived too long?)
  I have heard thee sigh.




ODE FOR A MASTER MARINER ASHORE


  THERE in his room, whene’er the moon looks in,
  And silvers now a shell, and now a fin,
  And o’er his chart glides like an argosy,
  Quiet and old sits he.
  Danger! he hath grown homesick for thy smile.
  Where hidest thou the while, heart’s boast,
  Strange face of beauty sought and lost,
  Star-face that lured him out from boyhood’s isle?

  Blown clear from dull indoors, his dreams behold
  Night-water smoke and sparkle as of old,
  The taffrail lurch, the sheets triumphant toss
  Their phosphor-flowers across.
  Towards ocean’s either rim the long-exiled
  Wears on, till stunted cedars throw
  A lace-like shadow over snow,
  Or tropic fountains wash their agates wild.

  Awhile, play up and down the briny spar
  Odors of Surinam and Zanzibar,
  Till blithely thence he ploughs, in visions new,
  The Labradorian blue;
  All homeless hurricanes about him break;
  The purples of spent day he sees
  From Samos to the Hebrides,
  And drowned men dancing darkly in his wake.

  Where the small deadly foam-caps, well descried,
  Top, tier on tier, the hundred-mountained tide,
  Away, and far away, his pride is borne,
  Riding the noisy morn,
  Plunges, and preens her wings, and laughs to know
  The helm and tightening halyards still
  Follow the urging of his will,
  And scoff at sullen earth a league below.

  Mischance hath barred him from his heirdom high,
  And shackled him with many an inland tie,
  And of his only wisdom made a jibe
  Amid an alien tribe:
  No wave abroad but moans his fallen state.
  The trade-wind ranges now, the trade-wind roars!
  Why is it on a yellowing page he pores?
  Ah, why this hawser fast to a garden gate?

  Thou friend so long withdrawn, so deaf, so dim,
  Familiar Danger, O forget not him!
  Repeat of thine evangel yet the whole
  Unto his subject soul,
  Who suffers no such palsy of her drouth,
  Nor hath so tamely worn her chain,
  But she may know that voice again,
  And shake the reefs with answer of her mouth.

  O give him back, before his passion fail,
  The singing cordage and the hollow sail,
  And level with those aged eyes let be
  The bright unsteady sea;
  And move like any film from off his brain
  The pasture wall, the boughs that run
  Their evening arches to the sun,
  The hamlet spire across the sown champaign;

  And on the shut space and the trivial hour,
  Turn the great floods! and to thy spousal bower,
  With rapt arrest and solemn loitering,
  Him whom thou lovedst, bring:
  That he, thy faithful one, with praising lip,
  Not having, at the last, less grace
  Of thee than had his roving race,
  Sum up his strength to perish with a ship.




THE RECRUIT


    SO much to me is imminent:
    To leave Revolt that is my tent,
  And Failure, chosen for my bride,

    And into life’s highway be gone,
    Ere yet Creation marches on,
  Obedient, jocund, glorified;

    And last of things afoot, to know
    How to be free is still to go
  With glad concession, grave accord,

    Nor longer, bond and imbecile,
    Stand out against the gradual Will,
  The guessed _Fall in!_ of God the Lord.




  _The Martyrs’ Idyl first came out in the Christmas
  number, 1898, of Harper’s Magazine. With
  the exception of that, of three poems taken from
  “England and Yesterday” (Grant Richards, London),
  and of one other, the contents of this volume
  appeared prior to 1896 in Harper’s, The
  Century, The Cosmopolitan, The Independent,
  The Chap-Book, etc., to
  all of which thanks are due
  for the courteous permission
  to reprint._




  ELECTROTYPED AND PRINTED
  BY H. O. HOUGHTON AND CO.

  The Riverside Press

  CAMBRIDGE, MASS., U. S. A.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Martyrs' Idyl, by Louise Imogen Guiney



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARTYRS' IDYL, AND SHORTER POEMS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


