The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Expedition to Birting's Land, and Other Ballads
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Expedition to Birting's Land, and Other Ballads

Editor: Thomas James Wise

Translator: George Borrow

Release date: October 6, 2008 [eBook #26793]

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXPEDITION TO BIRTING'S LAND, AND OTHER BALLADS ***


Transcribed from the 1914 Thomas J. Wise pamphlet by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





THE EXPEDITION TO
BIRTING’S LAND
AND OTHER BALLADS


                                    BY
                              GEORGE BORROW

                                 LONDON:
                     PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION

                                   1914

               _Copyright in the United States of America_
           _by Houghton_, _Mifflin & Co. for Clement Shorter_.




THE EXPEDITION TO BIRTING’S LAND


The King he o’er the castle rules,
   He rules o’er all the land;
O’er many a hardy hero too,
   With naked sword in hand.

Let the courtier govern his steed,
   The boor his thatchèd cot,
But Denmark’s King o’er castles rules,
   For nobler is his lot.

King Diderik sits on Brattingsborg,
   And round he looks with pride:
“No one I know of in the world
   Would me in fight abide.”

Then answered Brand Sir Viferlin,
   Had been in many a land:
“Methinks I know a warrior stout
   Would thee in fight withstand.

“He’s Ifald call’d, a king is he,
   In Birting’s land afar;
And he has fellows following him
   With savage wolves who war.

“O he has fellows following him
   ’Gainst teeth of bears who fight;
The food in which he most delights
   Is flesh of Christian wight.

“Every day in the East that dawns
   His mouth he’s wont to cool
With serpents, toads, and other filth,
   That come from the hellish pool.”

As Ifald sat on his throne that day
   He thus was heard to cry:
“Let some one bid my little foot page
   To come to me instantly.

“Now list to me, thou little foot page,
   On my errand thee I’ll send
Unto the King of Brattingsborg,
   To whom I am no friend.

“Tell him that he must tribute pay,
   Or for bloody war prepare;
Forsooth if him in the field I meet
   I him will little spare.”

Then answered straight the little foot page
   And a gallant answer he gave:
“My Lord thy message I’ll carry forth,
   Though they lay me in my grave.”

In came he, the little foot page,
   And stood before the board:
“Now list to me, King Diderik,
   My master has sent you word.

“Either tribute thou shalt pay,
   As thou didst last year agree,
Or thou shalt meet us in the field,
   And bloodshed there shall be.”

“I will not tribute pay, forsooth,
   I scorn to stoop so low;
Nay, rather unto Birting’s land
   With sword unsheathed I go.”

Then answer’d Vitting Helfredson,
   And loud he laughed with glee:
“If ye fare this year into Birting’s land
   I too of the troop shall be.

“Last year wast thou in Birting’s land,
   And there didst lose thy steed;
Thou hadst better stay in Brattingsborg
   Than again seek Birting’s mead.”

“On me, if I stay in Brattingsborg,
   Be every malison;
If I have no horse on which to ride
   I have legs on which to run.”

There rode out from Brattingsborg
   So many a knight renown’d;
The rocks were split ’neath the coursers’ feet,
   And quaked the startled ground.

There rode forth King Diderik,
   The lion upon his shield;
And there too glittered the golden crown
   So far across the field.

There rode Vidrik Verlandson,
   The hammer and tongs he bore;
And there rode good King Esmer’s sons,
   All men of wondrous power.

There rode the rich Count Rodengard,
   A warrior stout and fine;
And there rode King Sir Sigfred, who
   Displayed a monarch’s sign.

Then followed Siward Snarenswayne,
   With many arrows white;
And then came Brand Sir Viferlin,
   Who never fled from fight.

And next rode Hero Hogen,
   He looked a rose so brave;
And then rode Folker Spillemand,
   In his hand a naked glaive.

Then rode the bold young Ulf Van Yern,
   A glorious horse upon;
Behind him young Sir Humble rode,
   And then Sir Sigfredson.

And then rode Gunther and Gernot,
   With arrow on bended bow;
And there rode Sonne Tolkerson,
   With courage upon his brow.

There rode the little Grimmer,
   In golden acton dight;
And there rode Seyer the active,
   Who yields to none in might.

And then came master Hildebrand,
   As though to his courser fixt;
The stalwart friar Alsing rode
   The ancient hero next.

There rode Orm the Ungarswayne,
   So bold of heart was he;
So joyous were they every one,
   And sure of victory.

Out galloped they all from Brattingsborg,
   As fast as they could speed;
But Vitting bold came running behind,
   Because he had no steed.

It was hardy Angelfyr,
   To Grimselin he cried:
“O, he must on his bare legs run
   Who has no horse to ride!”

And still ran Vitting, and still ran he,
   Till with wrath he nigh was wode;
Then he struck a warrior from his horse
   And sat himself on, and rode.

It was Sir King Diderik,
   He back a glance did throw:
“O yonder I see the courtier ride
   Who on foot was wont to go.

“Here thou, Vitting Helfredson,
   Thou art a warrior bold;
Thou shalt hie forward to Birting’s land,
   And demand the tribute gold.

“With thee shall Vidrik Verlandson,
   And Diderik knight of Bern;
Of all my troop they are best at blows,
   And most for battle yearn.”

They set themselves upon their steeds,
   And away they rode like wind;
The knights they roared, and their steeds they gored,
   For wroth were they in mind.

The watchman stood on the battlement
   From whence he far could see:
“Yonder I warriors three espy
   Who wrathful seem to be.

“The one is Vitting Helfredson
   Who lost his steed last year;
That a rugged guest he’ll prove to us
   We have full cause to fear.

“The second is Vidrik Verlandson,
   As the tongs and hammer shew;
The third is Diderik Van Bern,
   All warriors good, I trow.”

They left their steeds in the castle yard,
   To the castle strode they in;
Then might each man by their faces see
   A fray would soon begin.

Upon the porter they laid their hands,
   And him to pieces hew’d;
Then in they strode to the high, high hall,
   And before the King they stood.

Then up rose Ifald the King in rage,
   And thus the King did cry:
“O, whence are come the ill-starr’d loons
   Before my board I spy?”

Then answered the skinker of the King,
   Who skinkèd wine and mead:
“Our sharp spears, if we ply them well,
   Will drive them out with speed.”

It was Vitting Helfredson,
   By the beard the skinker has ta’en;
He smote him a blow the ear below,
   Which dashed out half his brain.

He flung the dead corse on the board,
   And a merry jest had he:
“Who’ll taste,” said Vitting Helfredson,
   “This precious roast for me?”

Then forth stepped Diderik Van Bern,
   And, brandishing his glaive,
He hewed upon King Ifald’s head,
   And him to the navel clave.

And forth stepped Vidrik Verlandson,
   And round began to hew;
Heads and arms were smitten off
   As round and round he flew.

In came King Ifald’s mother grey,
   With an eldritch scream she came;
I tell to ye in verity
   There ensued a wondrous game.

Vitting struck her with his sword,
   A very fearful stroke;
But she kissed asunder the good sword,
   Into pieces three it broke.

With a single kiss of the witch’s mouth
   Was shivered the trusty sword;
Vitting the hag by the weazand seized,
   Without a single word.

The beldame changed herself to a crane,
   And flew to the clouds on high;
But Vitting donned a feather robe,
   And pursued her through the sky.

They flew for a day, they flew for three,
   Bold Vitting and the crane;
Then Vitting seized the crane by the legs,
   And her body rent in twain.

Homeward now, with sword in hand,
   The valiant comrades wended:
All the Birting kemps are dead,
   And the adventure ended.




THE SINGING MARINER
_A Ballad from the Spanish_


Who will ever have again,
On the land or on the main,
Such a chance as happen’d to
Count Arnaldos long ago.

With his falcon in his hand,
Forth he went along the strand;
There he saw a galley gay,
Briskly bearing for the bay.

Ask me not her name and trade,—
All the sails of silk were made;
He who steer’d the ship along
Raised his voice, and sang a song.

Sang a song whose magic force
Calm’d the breaker in its course;
While the fishes, sore amazed,
Left their holes and upward gazed.

And the fowl came flocking fast,
Round the summit of the mast;
Still he sang to wind and wave:
“God preserve my vessel brave!

“Guard her from the rocks that grow
’Mid the sullen deep below;
From the gust, and from the breeze,
Sweeping through Gibtarek’s seas.

“From the gulf of Venice too,
With its shoals and waters blue;
Where the mermaid chants her hymn,
Borne upon the billow’s brim.”

Forward stept Arnaldos bold,
Thus he spake, as I am told:
“Teach me, sailor, I entreat,
Yonder song that sounds so sweet.”

But the sailor shook his head,
Shook it thrice, and briefly said:
“Never will I teach the strain
But to him who ploughs the main.”




YOUTH’S SONG IN SPRING


O, scarcely is Spring a time of pure bliss,
   He is wrong who full trust thereon layeth;
From many it may
Take sorrow away,
   But to many it trouble conveyeth.

O, when every thing is as joyous in Spring,
   As in heaven, that never is dreary;
’Tis a grievous case
If one mournful must pace,
   And cannot be also merry!




THE NIGHTINGALE
_Translated from the Danish_


In midnight’s calm hour the Nightingale sings
   Of freedom, of love, and delight;
Come, haste to the grove where melody rings,
   ’Tis Philomel’s notes that invite.
A fowler attentively follows her there,
Resolv’d for his victim to spread out a snare:
_Think_, _girls_, _of the Nightingale’s fate_, _and beware_!

In ambush his nets he carefully brings,
   Glad innocence feels no alarm;
Unguarded her flight—’midst danger she wings—
   And falls into sorrowful harm.
Alas! she is silent, and full of despair,
He glides away quick with his treasure so rare:
_Think_, _girls_, _of the Nightingale’s fate_, _and beware_!

A beautiful cage adorns his fair prize,
   In hope that for him she will sing;
But Freedom, that wafted her notes to the skies,
   Bore Gladness away on its wing.
Thus you, Philomela, resemble the fair,
And we, we delight in the love that we share:
_O_, _think of the Nightingale’s fate_, _and beware_!




LINES


Say from what mine took Love the yellow gold
   To form those tresses? from what thorn-bush tore
   Those roses sleek? and from what summit bore
That stainless snow which seems no longer cold?




MORNING SONG
_Nu rinder Solen op_


From Eastern quarters now
   The sun’s up-wandering,
His rays on the rock’s brow
   And hill’s side squandering.
Be glad, my soul! and sing amidst thy pleasure,
   Fly from the house of dust,
   Up with thy thanks, and trust
To heaven’s azure!

O, countless as the grains
   Of sand so tiny,
Measureless as the main’s
   Deep waters briny,
God’s mercy is, which He upon me showereth.
   Each morning in my shell,
   A grace immeasurable
To me down-poureth.

Thou best dost understand,
   Lord God! my needing;
And placed is in Thy hand
   My fortune’s speeding,
And Thou foresee’st what is for me most fitting.
   Be still, then, O my soul!
   To manage in the whole
Thy God permitting.

May fruit the land array,
   And corn for eating!
May truth e’er make its way,
   With justice meeting!
Give thou to me my share with every other,
   ’Till down my staff I lay,
   And from this world away
Wend to another!




FROM THE FRENCH


This world by fools is occupied,
   And whom the sight of a fool displeases,
Within his chamber himself should hide,
   And break his looking-glass to pieces.




THE MORNING WALK


To the beech grove with so sweet an air
   It beckon’d me.
O, Earth! that never the cruel plough-share
   Had furrow’d thee!
In their dark shelter the flowerets grew,
   Bright to the eye,
And smil’d by my foot on the cloudlets blue,
   Which deck’d the sky.

To the wood through a field I took my way;
   There I could see
On the field an uppil’d stone-heap lay,
   ’Twixt hillocks three;
So anciently grayly white it stood,
   An oblong ring:
Here doubtless was held in the old time good
   A royal Ting.

The royal stone, which there doth stand,
   The Stol-king press’d,
With crown on head, and sceptre in hand,
   In sables drest.
And every warrior solemnly pac’d
   Peaceful in thought,
And down on his stone himself calmly plac’d—
   No sword he brought.

The king’s house stood on yonder height,
   With walls of power;
On yon had his daughter, the damsel bright,
   Her maiden bower.
Upon the third the temple stood,
   Through the North famed wide,
Where to Thor was offered the he-goat’s blood,
   In reeking tide.

O, lovely field! and forest fair,
   And meads grass-clad;
Her bride-bed Freya every where
   Enamelled had.
The corn-flowers rose in azure band
   From earthly cell;
Nought else could I do but stop and stand,
   And greet them well.

Welcome on earth’s green breast again,
   Ye flowerets dear!
In spring how charming ’mid the grain
   Your heads ye rear.
Like stars ’midst lightning’s yellow ray
   Ye shine red, blue:
O, how your summer aspect gay
   Delights my view.

O poet! poet! silence keep,
   God help thy case:
Our owner holds us sadly cheap,
   And scorns our race.
Each time he sees, he calls us scum,
   Or worthless tares;
Hell-weeds that but to vex him come
   ’Midst his corn-ears.

The greatest grace done for our sake
   In all his life,
Is from his pocket deep to take
   His huge clasp knife;
And heavy handful then to cut,
   ’Midst grumbling much—
Us with tobacco leaves to put
   In seal-skin pouch.

He says, he says, that smoked this way,
   We dross of the field,
To the world by chance, by poor chance, may
   Some benefit yield;
But as for our beauty, our blue and red hues,
   ’Tis folly indeed—
The mouth is his only test of use,
   And that’s his creed.

O wretched mortals!—O wretched man!
   O wretched crowd!—
No pleasures ye pluck—no pleasures ye plan
   In life’s lone road:—
Whose eyes are blind to the glories great
   Of the works of God;
And dream that the mouth is the nearest gate
   To joy’s abode.

Come flowers! for we to each other belong,
   Come graceful elf,
And around my lute in sympathy strong
   Now wind thyself;
And quake as if mov’d by zephyr’s wing,
   ’Neath the clang of the chord,
And a morning song with glee we’ll sing
   To our Maker and Lord!

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:

               Printed for THOMAS J. WISE, Hampstead, N.W.

                   _Edition limited to Thirty Copies_.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXPEDITION TO BIRTING'S LAND, AND OTHER BALLADS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


