The Project Gutenberg eBook of Little Engel: a ballad; with a series of epigrams from the Persian
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Little Engel: a ballad; with a series of epigrams from the Persian

Editor: Thomas James Wise

Translator: George Borrow

Release date: October 7, 2008 [eBook #26805]

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE ENGEL: A BALLAD; WITH A SERIES OF EPIGRAMS FROM THE PERSIAN ***


Transcribed from the 1913 Thomas J. Wise pamphlet by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                               LITTLE ENGEL
                                 A BALLAD
                             WITH A SERIES OF
                        EPIGRAMS FROM THE PERSIAN


                                    BY
                              GEORGE BORROW

                                 LONDON:
                     PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION

                                   1913




LITTLE ENGEL.


It was the little Engel, he
   So handsome was and gay;
To Upland rode he on a tide
   And bore a maid away.

In ill hour he to Upland rode
   And made a maid his prize;
The first night they together lay
   Was down by Vesteryse.

It was the little Engel he
   Awoke at black midnight,
And straight begins his dream to state
   In terror and affright.

“Methought the wolf-whelp and his dam,
   The laidly she-wolf gray,
Tore out my heart, and twixt their teeth
   Did hold it as I lay.”

“That thou dream’st little Engel thus
   Can cause slight wonderment,
When me thou’st ta’en by might and main
   Nor asked my friends’ consent.”

In came Solwey Johnsen then
   And stood before the table;
He was I ween, a clever lad,
   And well to speak was able.

“Hear thou, my lord, Little Engel,
   Rise up and straight begone;
For here Sir Godey Loumand comes
   By four ways to the town.”

“I fear not four, Solwey Johnsen,
   Nor five fear I, nor ten!
I fear not Godey Sir Loumand, though
   He come with thirty men.”

“O there are more than four, Sir,
   Or five, Sir, or than ten;
Here cometh Godey Sir Loumand with
   A hundred armed men.”

It was the little Engel, he
   Took Malfred in his arm:
“Now, dearest heart, some counsel give
   May free us from this harm.”

It was the little Engel, her
   Upon the white cheek kiss’d:
“Now do thou hear, my bosom’s dear,
   With counsel us assist.”

“The best advice that I can give
   I’ll give thee in this case;
To Mary’s Church we will retire,
   They’ll ne’er destroy that place.

“We’ll gold and silver take, and on
   The scale we’ll pile them high;
To-morrow from the Churchmen we
   The holy place will buy.

“Around you call your merry men all
   To whom you’ve given bread;
For refuge we to the Kirk will flee
   Since we are thus bestead.

“Do you take all your merry men who
   Your coursers’ backs have prest;
We’ll hie us to our Lady’s church,
   And set our hearts at rest.

“That’s the best counsel, love, I know,
   A simple woman I;
In Mary’s house we’ll lock ourselves,
   And there our foes defy.”

It was the little Engel,
   Into the church he went:
Sir Loumand to beleaguer him
   A hundred men has sent.

Before the kirk his men they lay
   Till full five months were past;
It was Godey Sir Loumand
   So wrathful grew at last.

Then spake the mother of little Malfred,
   With hate ’gainst her was fill’d:
“The Kirk of Maria burn with fire,
   And it with gold rebuild.”

The fire began to burn, to burn,
   The sparkles in they flew;
At that adread was little Malfred,
   And ashy pale she grew.

It was so hot in the Kirk yard when
   Abroad the blazes sped;
But in the Kirk still hotter when
   In poured the melted lead.

It was the little Malfred,
   So frantic was her mood:
“O let us quick the horses stick,
   And cool us with their blood.”

Then little Engel answer made,
   As on the floor he stood:
“But coolness small shall we derive
   From our good coursers’ blood.”

Answered the groom who loved the steeds
   As dearly as his breath:
“Ye’d better little Malfred stick,
   She well deserveth death.”

It was the little Engel,
   His arms round Malfred twin’d:
“No death hast thou deserved from us,
   And none from us shalt find.

“My little Malfred, do thou hear
   What I now say to thee;
If a son this year thou chance to bear,
   That son name after me.”

They placed her on a buckler,
   They placed their spears below,
And through the window lifted her
   With hearts so full of woe.

It was the little Malfred round
   The church goes staggering now,
Scorched were her scarlet robes, and scorched
   The ringlets on her brow.

It was the little Malfred fell
   Upon her white bare knee:
“O may I bear a son this year,
   The avenger of this to be.”

So they the little Malfred took
   And in a mantle roll’d,
And sorrowfully lifted her
   Upon a courser bold.

Outspake the little Malfred when
   She reached the verdant plain:
“Burnt is our Lady’s house this day,
   And burnt so bold a swain.

“Burnt is our Lady’s house, and burnt
   Therein so brave a swain;
His equal till the day of doom
   We ne’er shall see again.”

It happened in the autumn tide,
   The autumn of that year,
That she within her secret bower,
   A beauteous boy did bear.

To the holy Kirk they carried him,
   They christened him at night;
They called him little Engel, and
   Concealed him whilst they might.

They fostered him for winter one,
   And so on, till he grew
The fairest knight beneath the sun
   That you did ever view.

So well he grew and throve until
   Seven years had passed away:
“Thy uncle slew thy sire, my boy,
   For the first time, that I say.”

Still with his mother he remained
   Till five more years were sped:
“Thy uncle slew thy father, boy,”
   He heard most often said.

“Now do thou hear, my mother dear,
   Who sittest clad in pall;
Up under Oe I’ll riding go,
   And serve in the Monarch’s hall.”

“Yes, ride thee hence to Court, and there
   To win thee honor try;
Forget not who thy father slew,
   For the last time I cry.”

He served so long at court that he
   His friend the Dane King made;
With heavy heart he’d sit apart
   Whilst others laugh’d and play’d.

The Danish King observed at last
   He grieved at seasons all:
“Now hear, good youth, I’d know forsooth
   Why thou art sorrow’s thrall.

“Thou grievest like the little bird
   The greenwood bough upon;
Thou seemest like the lonely wight
   Whose friends are dead and gone.”

“Now do thou hear, thou King of the Danes,
   With grief I down am weigh’d;
My uncle slew my sire of old,
   And no atonement made.”

“If thou wilt up of the country ride,
   And well avenge that deed,
As many of my men to thee
   I’ll lend, as thou shalt need.

“If thou’lt avenge thy father’s death,
   Thou shalt have fitting aid;
Three hundred of my men to thee
   I’ll lend, in steel array’d.”

It was the little Engel, he
   Rides in the greenwood shade;
He marshals there his good men all,
   And sets him at their head.

In haste came in the little footboy,
   And stood before the table;
He was I ween a clever lad,
   And well to speak was able.

“Now hear, Sir Godey Loumand, hear,
   Arise and straight begone;
Little Engel’s coming with his troop
   By four ways to the town.

“Little Engel’s coming with his troop,
   And he’ll be on us soon;
And wroth is he, as wroth can be,
   His war-lance scrapes the moon.”

“At Stevn and Ting, my boy, I’ve been,
   And wherever people mingle;
But ne’er, I swear, have I been where
   I’ve heard of little Engel.”

It was Godey Sir Loumand,
   He stroked the page’s cheek;
“If thou canst give any good advice,
   My pretty footboy, speak.”

“If I can give any good advice
   Most certainly I will;
In your stone bower yourself immure
   From the approaching ill.

“The walls they are of marble stone,
   The doors they are of lead;
’Twill wondrous be, my lord, if we
   Therein are prisoners made.”

It was the little Engel, he
   Halted a while to gaze:
“O there doth lie the Kirk, where died
   My sire in smoke and blaze.

“And there doth stand the castle, where
   My uncle doth reside;
The amends that he shall pay this day
   The Lord in heaven decide.”

By four ways they the bower beset,
   And for admission call:
The little Engel, sprightly elf,
   Was foremost of them all.

It was Godey Sir Loumand, through
   The casement out looked he:
“Now hark, ye knaves, bid your captain tell
   Why ye bawl so furiously?”

Then answered little Engel straight
   Beneath his mantle ruddy:
“Engel he’s stiled, your sister’s child,
   And I am he, Sir Godey.”

Then answered Godey Sir Loumand, he
   Was surely wroth thereat:
“Ride hence, and boast not of thy birth,
   Thou art a bastard brat.”

“And though a bastard brat I be,
   My fortune’s not the worse;
Enough I hold of silver and gold,
   And ride on a gallant horse.

“And if a bastard brat I be,
   Thou mad’st me that I trow;
But still I’ve towers, and pleasant bowers,
   And of green woods enow.

“My sire thou slew’st, and no amends
   To me didst ever make;
Now scoff thou hast upon me cast,
   For which thy life I’ll take.

“Bring gold, my merry men, and that
   Before the threshold lay;
We’ll burn the bower this very hour,
   We well for it can pay.”

’Twas hot within the foreroom when
   The fire began to roar;
But hotter in the stone bower, when
   The lead began to pour.

It was the little Engel, he
   His courser never turned
To ride away from the castelaye
   Before the bower was burned.

Away at last he rode, and waved
   His hand in exultation,
Upon espying his uncle lying
   Amidst the conflagration.

Said little Engel, when he saw
   His uncle’s body shrink:
“Now thou hast quaffed the self same draught
   Thou mad’st my father drink.”

It was the little Engel, rode
   Home to his mother’s hall;
Before it stood his mother good,
   So fair arrayed in pall.

“Here dost thou stand, my mother dear,
   Arrayed in robes of pall;
I’ve ridden up the land, and well
   Avenged my father’s fall.”

It was the fair Dame Malfred, wrung
   Her hands and wept amain:
“I’d but one care before to bear,
   And now, alas, have twain!”

“Dear mother, thou wouldst have it so,
   Now thee in tears I find,
When duteously thy will I’ve done:
   How strange is woman’s mind!”

He turned his steed and rode away,
   His face with anger red;
With dishevelled hair, the Dame stood there,
   Such woeful tears she shed.

The little Engel hied him to
   The King his master’s court;
Abroad the Dane King stood, and hailed
   The youth in kindest sort.

Into the hall Sir Engel then
   With the good monarch went:
“My choicest thanks, thou noble King,
   For thy brave warriors lent.

“Now I’ve avenged my father’s death,
   Burnt is Sir Godey’s bower;
And he therein has found a tomb,
   Who slew my sire of yore.”




AN ELEGY.


Where shall I rest my hapless head,
   Heavy with grief? how plenteously
Must I the briny torrents shed—
   _Alack and woe is me_!

Our chief is gone, at last, at last,
   The safeguard of our nation he;
The glory of our age is past—
   _Alack and woe is me_!

Unto the swords, O father dear,
   Of foemen thirsting horribly
For blood, why leave thy children here?
   _Alack and woe is me_!

Of justice is the fountain dried,
   And mute the law’s high symphony;
Fallen is Europa’s brightest pride—
   _Alack and woe is me_.

There is a change of times and things
   That passeth on eternally.
Decreed by Him, the King of Kings—
   _’Tis right_—_but woe is me_!

Now is the earth with violets gay,
   And flowers manifold to see;
Now frozen ’neath the winter’s sway—
   _How brief the roses be_!

Now shews the sun his head of gold
   With a superior brilliancy;
Now hides as were he dead and cold—
   _Alack and woe is me_.

O father! I will lave thy tomb
   With tear-drops well becoming me;
Thy tomb with flowery herbs perfume—
   _How brief the roses be_!




EPIGRAMS.
_From the Persian_.


1.


Hear what once the pigmy clever
   To the stupid giant said:
Things are not of highest value
   Which do highest rear their head;
The sluggish horse is nothing better
   Than the donkey lowest bred.



2.


The man who of his words is sparing
   His strength and weakness hidden keeps;
Think not every thicket empty,
   Perchance in one a tiger sleeps.



3.


If thou would’st ruin ’scape, and blackest woe,
   Unto these words, these precious words attend:
Never be heedless of a mortal foe,
   Nor choose a proud and envious man for friend.



4.


Sit down with your friends in delightful repose
   When war and contention you see ’midst your foes;
But when to an end their contentions they bring,
   Then, then seize the bow, and get ready the sling.



5.


The hungry hound upon the bone will pounce
   He prowling finds, and not mistrustful pass;
He asks not whom it did belong to once,
   The prophet’s camel or the sinner’s ass.



6.


Great Aaroun is dead, and is nothing, the man
   Who left forty castles replete with gold store;
But living though dead is the great Nourshwan,
   In the good name he left he has death triumphed o’er.



7.


Though God provides our daily bread,
   Yet all must seek that bread I ween;
Though all must die, there is no need
   To rush the dragon’s jaws between.



8.
THE KING AND HIS FOLLOWERS.


If in the boor’s garden the King eats a pear,
His servants rapacious the tree will uptear;
For every five eggs he gives bounteously, more
Than five hundred fowls will his armies devour.



9.
THE DEVOUT MAN AND THE TYRANT.


If the half of a loaf the devout man receives,
The half of that half to the wretched he gives;
But no sooner a tyrant one kingdom has ta’en,
Than the wish of his heart is another to gain.



10.
THE CAT AND THE BEGGAR.


If a cat could the power of flying enjoy,
She all the world’s sparrows would quickly destroy;
If power in the hands of a beggar you place,
No mercy he’ll show to the beggarly race.



11.
THE KING AND TAYLOR.


The taylor who travels in far foreign lands,
Can always get bread by the work of his hands;
But the King who from throne and from country has fled,
Must oft without supper go sighing to bed.



12.
GOLD COIN AND STAMPED LEATHER.


Of the children of wisdom how like is the face
To pure gold that’s accepted in every place;
But the ignorant great are much like leather cash,
At home which though current, abroad is but trash.



13.


So much like a friend with your foe ever deal,
That you never need dread the least scratch from his steel;
But ne’er with your friend deal so much like a foe,
That you ever must dread from his faulchion a blow.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
               Printed for THOMAS J. WISE, Hampstead, N.W.

                   _Edition limited to Thirty Copies_.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE ENGEL: A BALLAD; WITH A SERIES OF EPIGRAMS FROM THE PERSIAN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


