The Project Gutenberg eBook of King Hacon's Death, and Bran and the Black Dog: Two Ballads
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: King Hacon's Death, and Bran and the Black Dog: Two Ballads

Editor: Thomas James Wise

Translator: George Borrow

Release date: October 7, 2008 [eBook #26803]

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KING HACON'S DEATH, AND BRAN AND THE BLACK DOG: TWO BALLADS ***


Transcribed from the 1913 Thomas J. Wise pamphlet by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                            KING HACON’S DEATH
                                   AND
                          BRAN AND THE BLACK DOG


                               TWO BALLADS

                                    BY
                              GEORGE BORROW

                                 LONDON:
                     PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION
                                   1913




KING HACON’S DEATH


And now has happened in our day
   What was in ancient time foretold:
Beneath his hand all Norroway’s land
   Has Hacon brought, the wise and bold.

Full many a warrior summons he
   From all the country far and near;
To Scotland’s realm, with shield and helm,
   Across the sea the King will steer.

As many as sword and helm can bear
   With him must sail across the foam;
All of fit age must follow their liege,
   Those who are not may tarry at home.

It was Hacon, Norroway’s King,
   Survey’d the gallant band with pride:
“I’m missing one—my Andfindson,
   O where does Olaf the stripling bide?”

Then answer’d him the little footboy,
   Not far that stood from the Monarch’s knee:
“Olaf, my Lord, will come on board
   As soon as weigh’d the anchors be.”

Then out they stood from Bergen town,
   And out from Bergen’s mole, I trow;
Silk is the sail they spread in the gale,
   Painted with blue is the deck below.

“Now Magnus hear, my son so dear,
   At home I tell thee thou must stay:
Aarhus to ward and Bergen to guard,
   For the keys of Norroway’s land are they.”

“Listen all dearest father mine,
   Recall thy word I entreat of thee;
To rule rough earls and Norroway churls
   Too ignorant far and too young I be.”

“Then clothe thee straight and clothe thee well,
   Since thou wilt follow me, my child:
But much I fear thou can’st not bear
   The toss of the sea and its billows wild.”

So out they stood from Bergen town,
   And ’twas at fall of evening grey;
The folk on the shore they griev’d full sore
   As that brave armament sail’d away.

And when they came to Lindeness,
   And the mounting billow the sail bespray’d,
In the breeze so fair the ship stood there
   As though to the bottom it fast were made.

Then said the King as he lean’d upon
   His trusty faulchion’s hilt of gold:
“I’m here in the dark, is there any clerk
   Or layman here can this thing unfold?”

Then out spoke Nilaus Noderness,
   As a glance he flung upon the deep:
“Doom’d men on board, have we my Lord,
   The truth from thee I cannot keep.”

It was our Norroway Hacon then
   Thereat so sorely troubled grew:
“I’m missing one, my Andfindson,
   Why meets not Olaf his father’s view?”

Then answer’d him the little footboy,
   As apart he stood from the Norway King:
“Beneath the deck lies Olaf sick,
   And much I fear he’s suffering.”

It was Hacon the Norway King
   To visit Olaf with speed he goes:
“What cheer, what cheer, my Olaf dear?
   Thy state to thy father straight disclose.”

“I feel no rest within my breast,
   Methinks my very heart will rend:
Would God, the King of all, would bring
   This horrible night to a speedy end.”

They watched o’er Olaf Andfindson,
   They watched o’er Olaf long nights twain;
And Hacon I say, of Norroway,
   By watching thus his death did gain.

It was Olaf Andfindson,
   He yielded up his gentle sprite;
’Twas Hacon grey of Norroway
   Before him held the big wax light.

O then King Hacon distrest he grew,
   The stripling’s corse he would not leave:
He pin’d away and sick he lay,
   His hoary Counsellors how they grieve.

“Cheer up,” they said.  “We’ve fought and bled,
   And almost won these foreign shores;
But if thou now from us should’st go
   A sad and dreary fate were ours.”

“My time is come, I can’t survive;
   Write ye my testament, I pray,
When I am gone do ye see done
   What with my dying breath I say:

“My son, King Magnus, I advise
   Ever the law of God to heed;
Justice above all things to love,
   And well, full well, with him ’twill speed.

“Priests and widows let him defend,
   And his reign, I trow, will not be brief;
The outlaw crew let him pursue,
   And hang unpitying every thief.

“These are the first things I request,
   And now I’ll crave another thing;
Ye’ll bury me with my ancestry
   In our Lady’s Church as beseems your King.”

To Bergen’s shore came tidings o’er
   Which made the hearts of the dauntless faint:
“Hacon is dead, our regal head,
   Relation near to Olaf Saint.”

In Orkney isle expir’d the King,
   On a Thursday morning that befell;
’Twas Pentecost when the King they lost,
   The mighty King whom they lov’d so well.

From high Kirkwall now sail’d they all,
   And to Bergen o’er their course they ply;
They laid in grave the Monarch brave,
   In the spot where the Monarch wish’d to lie.

A braver heart ne’er play’d a part,
   And never shone in Minstrel’s lay;
No King on earth can vie in worth
   With Hacon the Good of Norroway.




BRAN AND THE BLACK DOG


The day we went to the hills to chase
   Of dogs we had a brave company;
There heard we the songs of the feather’d race,
   The blare of the elk, and the roebuck’s cry.

In the hills we had no common sport,
   With our dogs and our arms many deer we slew;
When at noon we return’d to our silvan court,
   We were a well-pleas’d, laughing crew.

That night the house of the Fenian king
   With a band of joyous guests was fill’d;
The manner we sang, whilst we plied the string,
   In which the buck and the elk we kill’d.

The valiant Finn arose next day,
   Just as the sun rose above the foam;
And he beheld up the Lairgo way,
   A man clad in red with a black dog come.

I’ll tell ye what was the stranger’s mien:
   His complexion was that of the strawberrie;
White as the canach was his skin,
   Though black his hair, as black could be.

He came up with a lofty gait,
   Said not for shelter he sought our doors;
And wanted neither drink nor meat,
   But would match his dog ’gainst the best of ours.

We brought ’gainst that of the stranger youth
   The very best dogs within our bounds;
But the stranger dog had a desperate tooth,
   And quickly despatch’d for us fifty hounds.

A strange fight this, the great Finn said,
   As he turn’d his face towards his clan;
Then his face with rage grey fiery red,
   And he struck with his fist his good dog Bran.

Bran look’d at his master with much surprise,
   That his master should strike him surprise he felt—
“I could hew from the shoulder the hand,” Finn cries,
   “With which my dog that blow I dealt.”

Then Bran he shook his collar of gold,
   The mountains echoed with his bay;
His terrible eyes like fire-balls roll’d,
   And his mind was bent upon canine fray.

“Take off from his neck the collar of gold,
   Not right for him now such a thing to bear;
And a free good fight we shall behold
   Betwixt my dog and his black compeer.”

Now a likeness I’ll draw of my good dog Bran:
   His head was cover’d with shaggy hair,
His breast was broad and its colour tan,
   His houghs were crook’d, his quarters square.

Four yellow feet had he I ween,
   His sides were black but his belly fair;
A tinge of green on his back was seen,
   Of blood-red ears he’d a pointed pair.

The dogs their noses together placed,
   Then their blood was scatter’d on every side;
Desperate the fight, and the fight did last
   ’Till the brave black dog in Bran’s gripe died.

“O sure was I,” did Ossian cry,
   From the pillar of the dogs with stern delight,
“There was no dog in the Finn country
   Could inflict upon Bran the mortal bite.

“O Bran was a stag-hound Morong bred,
   And possess’d each canine guile and sleight;
There was no dog in leash e’er led
   Could consign our dog to the Western height.

“There’s many a damsel, heavenly bright,
   With azure eye and yellow hair,
In the land of the son of King Torc this night
   Would be proud with my dog her supper to share.”

A grave the valiant hero made
   For his good black dog in the field’s green breast;
Full fifty dogs the Fenians laid
   To the pibroch’s blast in the hill to the west.

We went to the dwelling of high MacCuol,
   With the king to drink, and dice, and throw;
The king was joyous, his hall was full,
   Though empty and dark this night I trow.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
               Printed for THOMAS J. WISE, Hampstead, N.W.

                   _Edition limited to Thirty Copies_.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KING HACON'S DEATH, AND BRAN AND THE BLACK DOG: TWO BALLADS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


