The Project Gutenberg eBook of Niels Ebbesen, and Germand Gladenswayne: Two Ballads
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Niels Ebbesen, and Germand Gladenswayne: Two Ballads

Editor: Thomas James Wise

Translator: George Borrow

Release date: October 7, 2008 [eBook #26833]

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NIELS EBBESEN, AND GERMAND GLADENSWAYNE: TWO BALLADS ***


Transcribed from the 1913 Thomas J. Wise pamphlet by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                              NIELS EBBESEN
                                   AND
                           GERMAND GLADENSWAYNE


                               TWO BALLADS

                                    BY
                              GEORGE BORROW

                                 LONDON:
                     PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION
                                   1913

               _Copyright in the United States of America_
           _by Houghton_, _Mifflin & Co. for Clement Shorter_.




NIELS EBBESEN.


All his men the Count collects,
   And from Slesvig marched away;
Never such as host was seen
   Or before or since that day.

Into Denmark marched the Count,
   Followed by so fair a band;
Banners twenty-four they bore,
   Power like theirs might none withstand.

Gert the Count to Randers rode,
   To bad counsel lending ear;
For from old it stood foretold,
   He should end there his career.

He would not the place avoid,
   But seemed bent to tempt his fate;
Of the rural lords and thanes
   He the quarters up will beat.

Knights and freeborn men apart,
   There trooped eighteen thousand bows;
Forty thousand made they all,
   Who could such a host oppose?

To Niels Ebbesen the Count
   Word to appear before him sent;
And safe convoy him he gave,
   Which should doubt and fear prevent.

Gert the Count met Ebbesen
   North of Randers by the sea:
“Welcome be, Niels Ebbesen!
   Say how matters stand with thee.”

To Niels stretched the Count his hand,
   And to parleying straight they go;
There was little then of jest,
   And of dallying less, I trow.

“Sir Niels Ebbesen, thou art
   Welcome as the flowers in spring;
How stand minds in North Jutland,
   Thence what tidings dost thou bring?

“Say how all thy wealthy friends
   And thy heart’s loved lady are;
Which dost wish for at my hands,
   Smiling peace, or bloody war?”

“Well stand minds in North Jutland,
   Each man’s courage there’s erect;
Say, dost come as friend or foe?
   What from thee may we expect?

“I have kindred in the North,
   Men of wealth and noble race;
Shouldst thou it require of them
   They’ll be ready for thy Grace.”

“Wise art thou, Niels Ebbesen,
   And thy prudence none can doubt;
When thou canst not straightway hit
   Widely then thou ridst about.

“Hear thou, Sir Niels Ebbesen,
   Thou must on mine errand ride;
Say, how many men thou hast
   Brought, on whom thou mayst confide?”

“Kindred, Sir, I have, and friends,
   ’Mongst the hardy Jutlanders;
Willingly they follow me
   To the stormy strife of spears.

“I have brought, such as they are,
   With me thirty mounted men;
Be they fewer, or be they more,
   Dear are they to Ebbesen.”

“Hast thou with thee thirty lads?
   That seems but a scanty force;
Yester e’en at Sir Bugge’s Gate
   Stood’st thou with a hundred horse.”

Backward Ebbesen recoiled,
   And with high flushed cheek replied:
“He nor knight nor gentleman
   Is, who me hath thus belied.

“Be it man or woman who
   To my face dares that to say,
Till I’ve answered suitably,
   Ne’er from him I’ll flinch away.”

“Hear thou, dear Niels Ebbesen,
   We thereof will talk no more;
To thy friend Sir Bugge ride,
   Him to serve me true win o’er.”

“If your errand I shall do,
   And to Bugge bold repair,
From thy part what I’m to say
   First to me thou must declare.”

“Bugge bold has me defied,
   Young Poul Glob has done the same;
Anders Frost makes one of them,
   Him your Chief ’tis said ye name.

“And e’en thou, Niels Ebbesen,
   Certain courtiers hast with thee,
Who have eaten of my bread,
   And have basely quitted me.

“First there is young Eske Frost,
   And his stalwart brothers two;
Without leave of mine obtained,
   From my service they withdrew.

“More there are whom I’ve obliged,
   And who pay me now no heed;
If to Bugge’s rede you list
   Soon ye’ll see how you will speed.”

“Nought of Bugge’s rede I know,
   What he’ll do or leave undone;
Eske thy true servant was,
   Cast no blame that knight upon.

“Eske Frost’s a gallant man,
   Guards his honour like his eye;
Sought he his discharge to gain,
   Why to him didst it deny?

“Custom ’tis in Danish land,
   And has been from days of eld,
That the man who will not serve
   Shall not be to serve compell’d.

“No two things, save Monk and cowl,
   Are for aye together tied;
As they loathe or like their place
   Courtmen ride away or bide.”

It was Count Sir Gert, could not
   Such like reasoning understand:
“No one ought to quit his lord
   Whilst that lord would him command.

“And, Sir Niels, too long thou hast
   Here stood idly chattering;
Either thou shalt Denmark quit,
   Or thou shalt on gallows swing.

“’Neath safe convoy since thou’rt come
   Thou shalt go withouten hurt;
To thy cost else thou should’st learn
   What it is to anger Gert.”

“I thy princely passport hold,
   Whether it avail or not;
If thou do me aught of harm,
   Infamy thy name will blot.

“Thieves mayst thou on gallows hang,
   To be torn by carn and crow;
For thy threat from native land,
   Wife, and child, I will not go.

“But if me from native land
   And my wife and babes you chase,
Thou shalt soon, for certainty,
   Rue thou e’er hast seen my face!”

“Ride away, Sir Ebbesen,
   Quickly hence thyself betake,
Or I will, as well I can,
   On thy skull the helmet break.”

“None e’er saw me so adread
   But that I could tremble still, {12}
Hear, Count Gert! look to thyself,
   Guard thee from approaching ill.”

“Ebbesen, thou tirest me,
   Suffering thus thy tongue to run;
Till to-morrow thou art safe,
   Even till the set of sun.

“This, and the next day till eve,
   Thou for me shalt be at rest;
But no belted knight am I
   If I be not soon thy guest.”

Swift away rode Ebbesen,
   Shook his iron-gloved fist in air:
“That I soon shall come again,
   Good Sir Count, in memory bear.”

Forward rode Niels Ebbesen,
   Spurred his steed till blood outflew;
With his men the Count remained,
   No one dared the knight pursue.

Till he reached his Castellaye,
   Still he rode withouten rest;
To his dear Dame he complained,
   Begged of her her counsel best.

“Here thou sitt’st, dear Housewife mine,
   What advice canst thou bestow?
Gert will drive me from the land,
   Hath declared himself my foe.

“To my choice three things he put,
   Least of all I liked the third;
I should join him, or the land
   Quit, or hang, such was his word.”

“Ah! what counsel can I give
   From my simple woman’s mind?
The most desperate counsel’s best,
   Can we but that counsel find.

“The most desperate counsel’s best,
   If we can but it discover;
Either slay the tyrant, or
   Burn the house the tyrant over.

“To the smithy lead your steeds,
   Let them all be shod anew;
Turn ye all the heels afore,
   Thus your trace will cheat the view.

“Turn ye all the heels afore,
   Track ye thus, I ween, can no man;
Never tell to mortal wight,
   Thou hast learnt this from a woman.”

“Here my gallant swains ye sit,
   Merry-making o’er your drink;
Every lad who loves his lord
   From his lord now must not shrink.”

Up then rose the Courtmen bold,
   To take on anew agreed;
Save Sir Niels’ sister’s son,
   From his uncle would recede.

Swore the knights a solemn oath
   That for him their lives they’d stake,
And with him would dauntless ride
   Wheresoe’er a fray he’d make.

So they rode to Fruerlund,
   From their steeds they there dismount;
Into Randers then they walked,
   To beat up the hairless Count.

It was Sir Niels Ebbesen,
   To the bridge of Randers came:
“He who’s loath to follow me
   Straightway his discharge may claim.”

Forward stepped the tiny Frost,
   Thought the truest of the true:
“Give me my dismissal, Sir,
   Give me horse and saddle too.”

So he sought and got discharge,
   Saddle got and steed withall;
But he served his master best
   That same day ere evening fall.

To the Count’s door rode Sir Niels,
   Ne’er from that withdrew his look;
Thrice thereon with iron lance
   Heavily the hero strook.

“Rise up from thy sleep, my lord!
   Let me in right speedily;
Thy dear brother, Henrik Count,
   Has dispatched me unto thee.”

“By my brother if thou’rt sent,
   Rest thee from thy journey long;
Me to-morrow in the Kirk
   Meet ’twixt mass and matin song.”

“Let your page but at the door
   Take from me the entrusted scroll;
Ribe hard invested is,
   Colding town is burnt to coal.

“Ribe hard invested is,
   Colding’s burnt, and Vedel’s flung
Open to our troops its gate,
   And Niels Ebbesen is hung.”

“If what thou hast told be truth,
   News it is to make one gay;
Thou shalt in respect be held
   Herald till thy dying day.

“Page! no more keep fast the door,
   Let me on the herald gaze;
For that we the land have won
   Is the sum of what he says.”

To the window went the Count,
   Thence his eye the lances caught:
“Ha! Niels Ebbesen’s at hand,
   Curse the hour I Denmark sought.”

Fierce with shields the doors they banged,
   Burst the locks with frequent blow:
“Hairless Count! art thou within?
   Hairless Count, we pledge thee now!”

“Set thee down, Niels Ebbesen,
   We shall things accommodate;
Let us send to Henrik Count,
   And Claus Krummedige straight.”

“Not so yesterday didst thou
   Speak, Sir Count, by Randers strand;
Then thou saidst that I should hang,
   Or should quit my native land.”

Up and spoke the Count’s footpage,
   Kinsman he to Ebbesen:
“By his words if ye be fooled
   Lost art thou and all thy men.”

Up and spoke the black young page,
   Black because he was not white:
“Straight desist from useless talk,
   Let, I rede, your faulchions bite.”

“I’ve no castles, Sir, which can
   Such a prisoner long contain;
Now, ye men, spare not your swords!
   Hew at him with might and main!”

So the tyrant Count they took,
   Made him kneel upon the floor;
And his bald head off they hewed,
   Hewed it off the bedstead o’er.

Soon as they the Count had slain,
   Loud the drums the alarum beat;
It was Sir Niels Ebbesen
   From the town would fain retreat.

From the town he hasted then,
   Dared no longer there to stay;
Soon met him Sir Ove Hals,
   And essayed to bar his way.

“Do thou hear, Sir Ove Hals!
   Do to me no injury!
Thou my faithful cousin art,
   Prythee, Ove, let me flee.”

“Our affinity I know
   Well I know its near degree;
But my Lord you’ve foully slain,
   Niels! I will not let thee flee.”

Bleat the sheep, the ganders hiss,
   Crows the cock upon the wall;
Ove Hals was sore beset,
   Must to the Holsteiners call.

’Gainst the Danes he could not stand,
   Must to the Holsteiners call;
“Murdered is your liege the Count
   Up, and on his butchers fall!”

Fight Sir Ove and Sir Niels,
   Ebbesen he would not fly,
He Sir Ove’s head smote off,
   Left the corse in blood to lie.

Ebbesen to Randers bridge
   Came, there grew the combat hot,
There he found the tiny Frost
   Who had late dismissal got.

Niels sped over Randers bridge,
   Holstein’s men came thronging after;
What did then the tiny Frost
   But the bridge drop in the water.

Thanks to Niels’s sister’s son,
   Well he served his uncle then;
In the firth the planks he cast,
   No bridge found the Holstein men.

Niels a widow visited,
   She’d but barley bannocks two,
One she gave to Niels, because
   He the hairless tyrant slew.

Ebbesen!  God sain thy soul,
   Never was a braver Dane;
Thou didst free thy fatherland
   From a foreign tyrant’s chain.

Christ bless every gallant man,
   Who shall both with mouth and hand,
In the time of its distress,
   Seek to serve his fatherland!




GERMAND GLADENSWAYNE


Our King and Queen sat o’er the board
   In high festivity;
Between them there was much discourse
   About the briny sea.

Our gallant King and youthful Queen
   They sailed across the foam;
Much better had it been for both
   That they had stayed at home.

But barely they a mile had gone
   When still the vessel stood,
There came a raven wild, who strove,
   To sink them in the flood.

“If any thing the ship doth hold
   Concealed beneath the main,
I’ll give thee, bird, a lump of gold
   To set it free again.

“O do not sink us in the sea,
   Swart bird,” exclaimed the Queen,
“And I’ll give thee a lump of gold
   Weighs Bismer pounds fifteen.”

“Gold and silver I heed them not,
   I crave another fee,
The treasure neath thy girdle fair
   Thou now must promise me.

“Plenty of gold I have myself,
   From gold no help you’ll find,
On what beneath your girdle’s hid
   I’ve firmly set my mind.”

“I give what neath my girdle’s hid,
   My bunch of keys—what more?
I’ll speedily have others forged
   If I but win to shore.”

Then straight she took the little keys
   And cast them overboard;
Away then flew the Raven, glad
   He had obtained her word.

The Queen walks on the yellow sand,
   Then o’er her came a gloom,
She felt that Germand Gladenswayne
   Was quick within her womb.

And from that day when five short months
   Her head had flitted o’er,
The Queen she went to the chamber high,
   And a lovely son she bore.

Born was he in the evening hour,
   They christened him at night;
They called him Germand Gladenswayne,
   Concealed him whilst they might.

They fostered him a winter’s space,
   They fostered him for nine;
The fairest youth he grew on whom
   The sun did ever shine.

So well he throve, so well he grew,
   His horse he well could ride,
Whene’er his mother on him gazed
   So woefully she sigh’d.

“Now list to me, my mother dear,
   One thing I fain would know;
Why dost thou sigh so piteously
   Whene’er I past thee go?”

“Now hear thou, Germand Gladenswayne,
   I’ve cause to be forlorn;
Beguiled I gave thee to a fiend
   Before thou yet wast born.”

“And do thou hear, my mother dear,
   All sorrow cast aside:
Whatever be the will of God
   By that I must abide.”

It chanced upon a harvest morn
   The breezes scarcely stirr’d,
That as the chamber door stood ope
   So wild a yell was heard.

In came the laidly bird of prey,
   And stood the Queen before:
“Dost thou remember, gracious Queen,
   Thy gift to me of yore?”

She swore by God, and by the saints,
   By all that’s good she swore,
That son nor daughter in the world
   She never, never bore.

Then flew away the bird of prey,
   With an eldritch shriek he’s flown:
“Whene’er I meet Germand Gladenswayne
   I’ll remember he’s my own.”

When Germand fifteen years had reached
   He’d fain a damsel wed;
He loved the daughter of England’s king,
   The angel-lovely maid.

His longing to be with his plighted maid
   He might no more withstand:
“O how shall I come across the foam
   To the flood-encircled land?”

It was Germand Gladenswayne,
   He donned his best array;
And he has ta’en to his mother dear
   To the lofty hall his way.

In came Germand Gladenswayne,
   In scarlet clad was he:
“O mother lend me thy feather robe
   To fly across the sea.”

“My feather robe hangs upon the crook,
   The feathers droop so low,
If thou dost fly to the foreign land
   I shall see thee never moe.

“The pinions are so broad that they
   Grow heavy in the air,
I’ll have another made for me
   If I live another year.”

He set himself in the feather robe,
   Flew o’er the ocean straight;
And there met him the raven wild,
   Beneath a rock did wait.

He flew up, and he flew down,
   He flew in fearless guise;
And when he reached the midst of the sea
   He heard a frightful voice.

“Ha, well met, Germand Gladenswayne,
   O’er long hast thou delay’d;
Thou wast but little when to me
   A present thou wast made!”

“O let me fare, O let me fly,
   To speak my maiden dear;
Be sure that I, when her I’ve seen,
   Again will meet thee here.”

“Then I will let thee fly, but still
   My mark on thee will set,
Lest thou midst knights and beauteous dames
   Thy raven lord forget.”

Then out the boy’s right eye he tore,
   And drank up half his blood;
But still he reached the bower of his bride,
   His heart was yet so good.

He set himself by the Damsels’ bower,
   All bloody and distrest;
All the dames within that were
   Forgot to smile and jest.

All the damsels grew so still,
   With horror sat they fast;
Except proud Damsel Adelude,
   Aside her work she cast.

All the maids within forsook
   Both jest and merry note;
’Twas the proud Damsel Adelude
   Her hands together smote.

“Now welcome, Germand Gladenswayne,
   Where hast thou been to play?
Say, why bebloodied are thy clothes,
   And pale thy cheeks as clay?”

“Farewell, dear Damsel Adelude,
   I soon from thee must fly;
For he must have my youthful life
   Who tore from me my eye.”

Her silver handled comb she took,
   And strove to comb his head;
For every hair that she did comb
   A briny tear she shed.

For every lock the maiden combed
   A stream of tears did run;
How often she the mother cursed
   Who had betrayed her son.

It was Damsel Adelude,
   She took him in her arm:
“Accursed be the wicked Dame
   Who caused us all this harm.”

“Hear thou, sweet Damsel Adelude,
   Curse not my mother so,
She had no power in this affair,
   We all to fate must bow.”

He set him in his feather robe,
   And mounted on the wind;
She set her in another robe,
   And followed fast behind.

“O turn thee, Damsel Adelude,
   Turn my beloved one,
Thy bower door doth open stand,
   Thy keys lie on the stone.”

“Though my bower door doth open stand,
   And my keys lie on the stone,
Yet I will follow thee to the place
   Where harm to thee was done.”

All the birds she cut so small
   She met with there on high,
Except the laidly Raven wild,
   And him she could not spy.

’Twas the proud Damsel Adelude
   Flew down towards the strand;
Nought found she of the Gladenswayne
   Except the good right hand.

She flew so wroth the clouds below
   The laidly bird to find;
She flew East, and she flew West,
   To slay him she designed.

She hacked the birds into pieces three,
   Before her knife that came;
But when she met the Raven wild
   Into ten she hacked his frame.

And still till she of sorrow died
   She flew across the heath;
It was for Germand Gladenswayne
   She suffered grief and death.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
               Printed for THOMAS J. WISE, Hampstead, N.W.

                   _Edition limited to Thirty Copies_.




Footnotes:


{12}  A common Danish expression denoting contempt for threat.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NIELS EBBESEN, AND GERMAND GLADENSWAYNE: TWO BALLADS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


