The Project Gutenberg eBook of Little Songs of Long Ago: More Old Nursery Rhymes
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Little Songs of Long Ago: More Old Nursery Rhymes

Arranger: Alfred Moffat

Illustrator: H. Willebeek le Mair

Release date: July 12, 2017 [eBook #55107]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Jason Isbell, June Troyer and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE SONGS OF LONG AGO: MORE OLD NURSERY RHYMES ***




Produced by Jason Isbell, June Troyer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Note:

    Irregular spelling, punctuation, and numbering preserved. Lyrics
    contained in the music notation are marked as [Music: lyrics].
    Ads from inside the dust jacket have been placed at the end.
    Music repeat signs are shown like this: ||:   :||.


                 Little
            Songs of Long Ago

        “More old Nursery Rhymes”

      The original tunes harmonized
                   by
              Alfred Moffat

             Illustrated by
          H. Willebeek Le Mair


              Augener Ltd.
                 London

              Philadelphia:
         David McKay, Publisher,
      604-8 So. Washington Square.




[Illustration]

  Copyright, 1912, by Augener Ltd.
        Printed in England.




Contents

                                       Page
    Dame get up and bake your pies        5
    Dance a baby diddy                    7
    Young lambs to sell                   9
    Over the hills                       11
    Little Polly Flinders                13
    The north wind                       15
    Old King Cole                        17
    Dance to your daddy                  19
    I saw three ships                    21
    Curly locks                          23
    London Bridge                        25
    Little jumping Joan                  27
    O dear, what can the matter be       29
    There came to my window              31
    The babes in the wood                33
    Simple Simon                         35
    Where are you going to?              37
    Lazy sheep                           39
    Three mice went to a hole            41
    Four and twenty tailors              43
    See Saw, Margery Daw                 45
    The crooked man                      47
    Lavender blue                        49
    Little Tom Tucker                    51
    A frog he would a-wooing go          53
    The spider and the fly               55
    I had a little nut tree              57
    Goosey Gander                        59
    A little cock sparrow                61
    Sleep baby, sleep                    63


       Uniform with this volume
        Our Old Nursery Rhymes
  30 Illustrations by the same Artist




[Illustration]


DAME GET UP AND BAKE YOUR PIES.


    [Music:

    1. Dame, get up and bake your pies,
    Bake your pies, bake your pies;
    Dame, get up and bake your pies
    On Christmas Day in the morning]

    2. Dame, what makes your maidens lie?
    Maidens lie, maidens lie;
    Dame, what makes your maidens lie
    On Christmas Day in the morning?

    3. Dame, what makes your ducks to die? etc

    4. “Their wings are cut, they cannot fly; etc.




[Illustration]


DANCE A BABY DIDDY.


    [Music:

    Dance a Baby Diddy,
    What can mammy do wid ’e?
    Sit in her lap,
    Give it some pap,
    And dance a Baby Diddy!]




[Illustration]


YOUNG LAMBS TO SELL.


    [Music:

    Young lambs to sell, young lambs to sell,
    Young lambs to sell, young lambs to sell;
    If I’d as much money as I could tell
    I wouldn’t come here with young lambs to sell.
    Two for a penny, eight for a groat,
    As fine young lambs as ever were bought.]




[Illustration]


OVER THE HILLS AND FAR AWAY.


    [Music:

    1. Tom he was a piper’s son,
    He learnt to play when he was young;
    But all the tune that he could play,
    Was “Over the hills and far away.”
    Over the hills and a great way off
    The wind shall blow my top-knot off!]

    2. Tom with his pipe made such a noise
    That he pleased both the girls and boys.
    And so they stopped to hear him play
    “Over the hills and far away.” etc




[Illustration]


LITTLE POLLY FLINDERS.


    [Music:

    Little Polly Flinders
    Sat among the cinders
    Warming her pretty little toes.
    Her mother came and caught her
    And smacked her little daughter
    For spoiling her nice new clothes.]




[Illustration]


THE NORTH WIND DOES BLOW.


    [Music:

    The North Wind does blow
    And we shall have snow;
    And what will the Robin do then, poor thing?
    He’ll sit in the barn
    To keep himself warm,
    And hide his head under his wing, poor thing!]




[Illustration]


OLD KING COLE.


    [Music:

    Old King Cole was a merry old soul,
    And a merry old soul was he:
    And he called for his pipe,
    And he called for his bowl,
    And he called for his fiddlers three.
    Ev’ry fiddler had a fiddle fine,
    A very fine fiddle had he;
    Then tweedle-dee went the fiddlers three,
    And so merry we will be.]




[Illustration]


DANCE TO YOUR DADDY.


    [Music:

    Dance to your daddy
    My little laddie!
    Dance to your daddy
    My little lamb!

    You shall have a fishy
    On a little dishy,
    You shall have a fishy
    When the boat comes in!

    Dance to your daddy
    My little babby!
    Dance to your daddy
    My little lamb!]




[Illustration]


I SAW THREE SHIPS COME SAILING BY.


    [Music:

    1. I saw three ships come sailing by,
    Sailing by, sailing by;
    I saw three ships come sailing by
    On New Year’s Day in the morning.]

    2. And what do you think was in them then, etc.

    3. Three pretty girls were in them then, etc.

    4. And one could whistle, and one could sing,
    The other could play on the violin;
    Such joy there was at my wedding
    On New Year’s Day in the morning.




[Illustration]


CURLY LOCKS.


    [Music:

    Curly Locks, Curly Locks, wilt thou be mine?
    Thou shalt not wash dishes, nor feed the swine;
    But sit on a cushion and sew up a seam,
    And eat fine strawberries, sugar and cream.
    Curly Locks, Curly Locks, wilt thou be mine?
    Thou shalt not wash dishes, nor feed the swine.]




[Illustration]


LONDON BRIDGE IS BROKEN DOWN.


    [Music:

    1. London Bridge is broken down,
                Dance over my Ladye Lea;
    London Bridge is broken down
                With a gay ladye!]

    2. How shall we build it up again?
                Dance over my Ladye Lea!
    How shall we build it up again?
                With a gay ladye!

    3. Silver and gold will be stole away, etc.

    4. Build it up with iron and steel, etc.

    5. Iron and steel will bend and bow, etc.

    6. Build it up with wood and clay, etc.

    7. Wood and clay will wash away, etc.

    8. Build it up with stone so strong, etc.




[Illustration]


LITTLE JUMPING JOAN.


    [Music:

    Here am I, little jumping Joan,
    When nobody’s with me I’m always alone.]




[Illustration]


OH! DEAR, WHAT CAN THE MATTER BE?


    [Music:

    Oh! dear, what can the matter be?
    Oh! dear, what can the matter be?
    Oh! dear, what can the matter be?
    Johnny’s so long at the fair.

    He promised to bring me a basket of posies,
    A garland of lilies, a garland of roses.
    He promised to bring me a bunch of blue ribbons
    To tie up my bonny brown hair.

    Oh! dear, what can the matter be?
    Oh! dear, what can the matter be?
    Oh! dear, what can the matter be?
    Johnny’s so long at the fair.]




[Illustration]


THERE CAME TO MY WINDOW.


    [Music:

    1. There came to my window one morning in spring
    A sweet little robin, she came there to sing;
    The tune that she sang it was prettier far
    Than any I heard on the flute or guitar.]

    2. Her wings she was spreading to soar far away,
    Then resting a moment seem’d sweetly to say:—
    “Oh happy, how happy the world seems to be,
    Awake, little girl, and be happy with me!”

    3. But just as she finished her beautiful song,
    A thoughtless young man with his gun came along;
    He killed and he carried my robin away,
    She’ll never sing more at the break of the day.




[Illustration]


THE BABES IN THE WOOD.


    [Music:

                1. My dears, you must know,
                That a long time ago,
    Two poor little children, Whose names I don’t know,
                Were stolen away
                On a fine summer’s day,
    And left in the wood, as I’ve heard the folk say.
                Poor Babes in the Wood!
                Poor Babes in the Wood!
    Don’t you remember the Babes in the Wood?]

                2. And when it was night,
                So sad was their plight,
    The sun it went down, and the moon gave no light;
                They sobb’d and they sigh’d
                And they bitterly cried,
    And the poor little things they then lay down and died.
                Poor Babes in the Wood! etc.

                3. And when they were dead,
                The robins so red,
    Brought strawberry leaves to over them spread,
                Then all the day long,
                The branches among,
    They mournfully whistled, and this was their song:
                Poor Babes in the Wood! etc.




[Illustration]


SIMPLE SIMON.


    [Music:

    Simple Simon met a Pieman
    Going to the fair;
    Said Simple Simon to the Pieman
    “Let me taste your ware.”
    Said the Pieman unto Simon
    “Show me first your penny,”
    Said Simple Simon to the Pieman
    “Indeed, I have not any.”]




[Illustration]


WHERE ARE YOU GOING TO, MY PRETTY MAID?


    [Music:

    1. “Where are you going to, my pretty maid?
    Where are you going to, my pretty maid?”
    “I’m going a milking, Sir,” she said,
    “Sir!” she said, “Sir!” she said,
    “I’m going a milking, Sir,” she said.]

    2. ||:“May I go with you, my pretty maid?:||
    “You’re kindly welcome, Sir,” she said.

    3. ||:“What is your fortune, my pretty maid?:||
    “My face is my fortune, Sir,” she said.

    4. ||:“Then I can’t marry you, my pretty maid?:||
    “Nobody asked you, Sir,” she said.




[Illustration]


LAZY SHEEP, PRAY TELL ME WHY?


    [Music:

    Lazy sheep, pray tell me why
    In the pleasant field you lie,
    Eating grass and daisies white
    From the morning till the night?
    Ev’rything can something do,
    But what kind of use are you?]

    2. “Nay, my little master, nay,
    Do not serve me so, I pray;
    Don’t you see the wool that grows
    On my back to make your clothes?
    Cold, ah, very cold you’d be
    If you had not wool from me.”




[Illustration]


THREE MICE WENT INTO A HOLE TO SPIN.


    [Music:

    1. Three mice went into a hole to spin;
    Puss passed by, and Puss looked in;
    “What are you doing, my little men?”
    “Weaving coats for Gentlemen”
    “Please let me help you to wind off your threads;”
        “Ah, no, Mistress Pussy, you’d bite off our heads!
        Ah, no, Mistress Pussy, you’d bite off our heads!”]

    2. Says Puss: “You look so wondrous wise,
    I like your whiskers and bright black eyes;
    Your house is the nicest house I see,
    I think there is room for you and me.”
    The mice were so pleased that they opened the door.
        And Pussy soon laid them all dead on the floor.
        And Pussy soon laid them all dead on the floor.




[Illustration]


FOUR-AND-TWENTY TAILORS.


    [Music:

    Four-and-twenty tailors
    Went to kill a snail;
    The best man among them
    Durst not touch her tail
    She put out her horns
    Like a little Kyloe cow;
    Run, tailors, run!
    Or she’ll kill you all e’en now!]




[Illustration]


SEE-SAW, MARJORIE DAW.


    [Music:

    See saw, Marjorie Daw,
    Jacky shall have a new master.
    Jacky shall have but a penny a day
    Because he can’t work any faster.]




[Illustration]


THERE WAS A CROOKED MAN.


    [Music:

    There was a crooked man
    And he went a crooked mile,
    He found a crooked sixpence
    Upon a crooked stile.
    He bought a crooked cat
    Which caught a crooked mouse,
    And they all lived together
    In a little crooked house.]




[Illustration]


LAVENDER’S BLUE.


    [Music:

    1. Lavender’s blue, diddle, diddle!
    Lavender’s green;
    When I am King diddle, diddle!
    You shall be Queen.]

    2. Call up your men, diddle, diddle!
    Set them to work.
    Some to the plough, diddle, diddle!
    Some to the cart

    3. Some to make hay, diddle, diddle!
    Some to cut corn;
    While you and I, diddle, diddle!
    Keep ourselves warm




[Illustration]


LITTLE TOM TUCKER.


    [Music:

    Little Tom Tucker
    Sings for his supper;
    What shall we give him?
    White bread and butter.
    How can he cut it
    Without e’er a knife?
    How can he marry
    Without e’er a wife?]




[Illustration]


A FROG HE WOULD A-WOOING GO


    [Music:

    1 A frog he would a wooing go
                              “Heigh-ho!” said Rowley;
    A frog he would a wooing go,
    Whether his mother would let him, or no,
                              With a rowly, powly, gammon and spinach,
                              “Heigh-ho!” said Anthony Rowley]

    Off he set with his opera hat,
                              “Heigh-ho!” said Rowley;
    Off he set with his opera hat,
    And on the road he met with a rat,
                              With a rowly, powly, &c

    Soon they arrived at the mouse’s hall,
    They gave a loud tap, and they gave a loud call,
                              With a rowly, powly, &c.

    “Pray Mr. Frog will you give us a song?
    Let the subject be something that’s not over long,”
                              With a rowly, powly, &c

    “Indeed, Mrs. Mouse!” replied the frog,
    “A cold has made me as hoarse as a hog,”
                              With a rowly, powly, &c

    “Since you have caught cold, Mr. Frog,” mousy said,
    “I’ll sing you a song that I have just made,”
                              With a rowly, powly, &c

    As they were in glee and merry making
    A cat and her kittens came tumbling in
                              With a rowly, powly, &c.

    The cat she seized the rat by the crown
    The kittens they pulled the little mouse down,
                              With a rowly, powly, &c.

    This put Mr. Frog in a terrible fright,
    He took up his hat and he wished them good-night,
                              With a rowly, powly, &c

    As froggy was crossing it over a brook,
    A lily-white duck came and gobbled him up
                              With a rowly, powly, &c

    So here is an end of one, two and three,
                              “Heigh-ho!” said Rowley;
    So here is an end of one, two and three
    The rat, the mouse, and the little froggy,
                              With a rowly, powly, &c.




[Illustration]


THE SPIDER AND THE FLY.


    [Music:

    1. “Will you walk into my parlour?” Said the Spider to the Fly.
    “’Tis the prettiest little parlour That ever you did spy;
    The way into my parlour is up a winding stair,
    And I have many pretty things to show you when you’re there.”
    “Oh, no, no!” said the little Fly. “To ask me is in vain,
    For who goes up your winding stair, shall ne’er come down again.”

    2. I am sure you must be weary, dear! with soaring up so high,
    Will you rest up on my little bed?” said the Spider to the Fly;
    “There are pretty curtains drawn around, the sheets are fine and thin,
    And if you like to rest awhile, I’ll snugly tuck you in:”
    “Oh, no, no!” said the little Fly, “For I have heard it said,
    They never, never wake again who sleep upon your bed.”]

    The Spider turned him round about and went into his den,
    For well he knew the silly Fly would soon come back again;
    So he wove a subtle web in a little corner sly,
    And he set his table ready to dine upon the Fly:
    Then he came out to his door again and merrily did sing,
    “Come hither, hither, pretty Fly with the pearl and silver wing.”

    Alas! alas! how very soon this silly little Fly,
    Hearing all these flattering speeches came quickly buzzing by;
    With gauzy wing she hung aloft, then near and nearer drew,
    Thinking only of her crested head and gold and purple hue:
    Thinking only of her brilliant wings poor silly thing, at last
    Up jumped the wicked Spider and fiercely held her fast!




[Illustration]


I HAD A LITTLE NUT-TREE.


    [Music:

    I had a little nut tree
    Nothing would it bear
    But a silver nutmeg
    And a golden pear.

    The King of Spain’s daughter
    Came to visit me
    And all for the sake
    Of my little nut-tree]




[Illustration]


GOOSEY, GOOSEY, GANDER.


    [Music:

    Goosey, goosey, gander,
    Where shall I wander?
    Upstairs and downstairs
    And in my lady’s chamber.]

    There I met an old man
    Who would not say his prayers,
    So I took him by the left leg,
    And threw him down the stairs.




[Illustration]


A LITTLE COCK-SPARROW.


    [Music:

    1. A little cock-sparrow sat on a green tree,
    And he chirrup’d, he chirrup’d, so merry was he;
    A naughty boy came with his wee bow and arrow,
    Determined to shoot the little cock-sparrow.]

    2. “This little cock-sparrow shall make me a stew
    And his giblets shall make me a little pie too:”
    “Oh, no!” said the sparrow, “I won’t make a stew,”
    So he flapped his wings, and away he flew.




[Illustration]


SLEEP, BABY, SLEEP.


    [Music:

    1. Sleep, baby, sleep!
    Our cottage vale is deep;
    The little lamb is on the green,
    With snowy fleece so soft and clean
        Sleep, baby, sleep!]

    2. Sleep, baby, sleep!
    Thy rest shall angels keep,
    While on the grass the lamb shall feed,
    And never suffer want or need.
        Sleep, baby, sleep!




[Illustration]


PRINTED BY AUGENER LTD. 287 ACTON LANE, LONDON W. 4.




WORKS ILLUSTRATED

IN COLOUR BY

H. WILLEBEEK Le MAIR


SONG BOOKS:

  OUR OLD NURSERY RHYMES
  LITTLE SONGS OF LONG AGO

Each book containing 30 of the most popular Nursery Rhymes.

  OLD DUTCH NURSERY RHYMES

16 full page illustrations in colour.


CHILDREN’S BOOKS:

  THE CHILDREN’S CORNER
  LITTLE PEOPLE

Each book contains 16 pictures of Child Life
with Rhymes by R. H. ELKIN.


NURSERY RHYME BOOKS:

  1 GRANNIE’S LITTLE RHYME BOOK
  2 MOTHER’S LITTLE RHYME BOOK
  3 AUNTIE’S LITTLE RHYME BOOK
  4 NURSIE’S LITTLE RHYME BOOK
  5 DADDY’S LITTLE RHYME BOOK
  6 BABY’S LITTLE RHYME BOOK

Delightful little Booklets, containing 10 of the
most popular Rhymes, with Illustrations in colour.


PIANO ALBUM:

  Schumann’s Children’s Pieces


CHILDREN’S POSTCARDS

IN COLOUR.

Eleven Sets of 12 Cards.

  Set
  No.
   1. Our Old Nursery Rhymes
   2. Little Songs of Long Ago
   3. Old Rhymes with New Pictures
   4. Small Rhymes for Small People
   5. More Old Nursery Rhymes
   6. The Children’s Corner
   7. Children’s Pieces—Schumann
   8. Games and Pastimes
   9. Little People
  10. Old Dutch Nursery Rhymes
  11. English & Dutch Rhymes


        AUGENER Ltd.
           LONDON
  DAVID McKAY, Philadelphia







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE SONGS OF LONG AGO: MORE OLD NURSERY RHYMES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


