The Project Gutenberg eBook of More About Teddy B. and Teddy G., the Roosevelt Bears
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: More About Teddy B. and Teddy G., the Roosevelt Bears

Author: Seymour Eaton

Illustrator: R. K. Culver

Release date: May 23, 2021 [eBook #65424]

Language: English

Credits: Richard Tonsing, MFR, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MORE ABOUT TEDDY B. AND TEDDY G., THE ROOSEVELT BEARS ***

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “From noon till night they let things go,
  In sky above and on earth below.”
]




[Illustration]

                               MORE ABOUT
                         Teddy B. and Teddy G.
                                  THE
                            ROOSEVELT BEARS
    Being Volume Two Depicting their further Travels and Adventures.


                                  _By_
                             Seymour Eaton
                              (PAUL PIPER)


                             Illustrated by
                              R. K. Culver


                      EDWARD STERN & COMPANY, Inc.
                              PHILADELPHIA
                                 MCMVII




                            Copyright, 1906
                            By Seymour Eaton

                            Copyright, 1907
                    By Edward Stern & Company, Inc.

                          All rights reserved


                      Published September 1, 1907




                         MORE ABOUT THESE BEARS


When in the autumn of 1905, I created the characters of TEDDY-B and
TEDDY-G I builded better than I knew. I brought these bears out of their
mountain den in Colorado and started them on their tour of the East to
teach children that animals, even bears, may have some measure of human
feeling; that the primary purpose of animals is not necessarily that of
supplying sport for the hunter. That this lesson has been abundantly
taught is proven by the overwhelming welcome given the Teddy Bears by
the boys and girls of the United States; and it is safe to say that the
traditional “bear will get you” has now and forever lost its frightening
significance.

This book is a sequel to “The Travels and Adventures of the Roosevelt
Bears,” and completes the story of the tour of TEDDY-B and TEDDY-G from
Colorado to Washington. The third volume will report in jingle and
picture the tour of the Teddy Bears abroad.

[Illustration: _Seymour Eaton_]

 ATH-DARA
   Lansdowne, Pa.




                      LIST OF COLOR ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                    Page
 “To ride bare-backed in the hurdle shute,
 Or join a band with drum and flute.”                              Cover

 “From noon till night they let things go,
 In sky above and on earth below.”                          Frontispiece

 “With bags on backs and sticks in hand,
 They started their tramp across the land.”                           11

 “They climbed up ladders in clouds of smoke,
 And lifted hose and windows broke.”                                  22

 “‘Good afternoon,’ said TEDDY-B,
 ‘Is this Buster Brown and Tige I see?’”                              35

 “Dressed and ready for hours of fun,
 With cavalry horse or battery gun.”                                  49

 “TEDDY-B threw the monkey and made him yell,
 And caught him every time he fell.”                                  60

 “‘We’ve sailed before,’ said TEDDY-B,
 ‘We hit Chicago down a tree.’”                                       73

 “As Dublin Mike and Pat from Cork,
 They came on the stage to look for work.”                            87

 “Across the sand in running dash,
 They struck the breakers with a splash.”                             98

 “At the Liberty Bell they took a try,
 And hoisted it up both good and high.”                              111

 “‘You mind these things,’ said TEDDY-G,
 ‘Our breakfast hour is half-past three.’”                           125

 “They met a lad on his way from school,
 Whom they stopped to question about a rule.”                        136

 “Said TEDDY-B, ‘Pay up the fares,
 We’ll pass to-morrow as millionaires,’”                             149

 “When Teddy Bears would rulers be,
 And hunt for men in cave or tree.”                                  167

 “With outstretched hand and smiling face,
 He gave them welcome to the place.”                                 178




[Illustration]

                                How The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                                reached
                                NEW YORK


[Illustration]

 The Roosevelt Bears were born out West
 In a big ravine near a mountain crest,
 Where they lived as cubs and had such play
 As Teddy Bears have every day.
 But they learned some things as years went by
 Of cities great and buildings high,
 And trains that run at rapid speed,
 And schools which teach folks how to read,
 And circus clowns and phonograph
 And other things which make folks laugh,
   And big hotels where meals they say
     Are served in style both night and day.
       They had heard of men of great renown
         Who lived and died in Boston town;
           Of rulers brave and statesmen bold
             And millionaires with barrels of gold;
               Of men who work just day by day
                 For boys and girls and daily pay;
                   And of one they heard who works for fun:
                     The President at Washington.

[Illustration]

             These bears some travel books had found
                 Which told them the world is round.
                     They made up their minds that they would see
                         And learn about geography
 And visit cities everywhere
     And introduce the Teddy Bear.
         They found some gold in a cave one day
             Which they could use to pay their way.

[Illustration:

  “_They found some gold in a cave one day._”
]

 So one bright morn they said good-bye
     To cave and creek and mountain high,
         To an old bobcat with a bandaged knee,
             To a young cougar and squirrels three,
                 To a big-horn sheep and a mountain deer,
                     And to other friends that lived quite near;
                         And with bags on backs and sticks in hand
                           They started their tramp across the land.
 The black bear’s name was TEDDY-B;
     The B for black or brown, you see.

[Illustration]

         And TEDDY-G was the gray bear’s name;
             The G for gray; but both bears came
                           For “Teddy” because
                           Children called them Teddy Bears.

[Illustration]

 The “Teddy” part is a name they found
 On hat and tree and leggings round,
 On belt and boot and plates of tin,
 And scraps of paper and biscuits thin,
 And other things a hunter dropped
 At a mountain camp where he had stopped.

 The story tells how these Teddy Bears
 Scattered forever all blues and cares,
 And made fun and frolic and mischief too,
 And did some tricks for bears quite new;

 And how some boys, the stories tell,
 Liked these two Teddy Bears so well
 That they made a million for the stores to sell:
 Some quite little, for children small,
 And some as big as the bears are tall;

 The brown ones looking like TEDDY-B,
 And the white as funny as TEDDY-G.

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “With bags on backs and sticks in hand,
  They started their tramp across the land.”
]

[Illustration]

 The story goes on to tell how far
 These two bears rode in a Pullman car,
 And the tricks they played on folks that night
 When the colored porter put out the light;

 And how TEDDY-G wouldn’t sleep upstairs
 “On a shelf,” he said, “too small for bears.”
 He wanted a window; he wanted to see;
 And he kept folks awake till half-past three.

[Illustration]

 And the story tells of other tricks
 In the dining car, and of a mix
 When TEDDY-G pulled a rope on top
 And brought the train to a sudden stop;

 And how the two were put off the train
 On a Kansas farm in a shower of rain.
 The fun they had from that time on
 Fills every page of Book Number One.

[Illustration]

 They started by learning the famous trick
 How farmer boys get ahead so quick.

 But the things they did would take your breath,
 For they scared the farmer half to death.

 The horses were put at gathering eggs,
         And pigs walked round on two hind legs,
                 And sheep were given the corn to hoe
                         And potatoes to plant and wheat to sow.

[Illustration]

 The story tells how an angry bull
 Made a pasture field look pretty full
 And chased the two bears round a stack
 And over the top and down and back.

 From there to a district school they went,
 On mischief and education bent,
 Where things were done by TEDDY-B,
 Who hit the desk and said that he

[Illustration]

 Would make letters dance and figures fly
 And good boys laugh and bad boys cry;
 The questions he gave; and the boys, their look;
 They had never seen them in a book:

 If a camel can go without water a week
 How long can he go if he owns a creek?
 And this, to bound the moon and sky,
 And name the capital of by-and-by;

 And a hundred more as hard and tough,
 Till the children said they had enough;
 But when they left the school that day
 The children were happy, the farmers say.

 The story tells how in railway style
   They ran an engine for a mile
     And spent a day at a county show
       And helped the boys to make things go;
         How they walked on ropes drawn good and tight
           And jumped through hoops and landed right;

[Illustration]

 And of the ride in an old balloon
 Which took them half-way to the moon;
 And things that happened in the sky that night
 And the way the world went out of sight;
 And how they landed in Lincoln Park
 In Chicago town just ’fore dark,

[Illustration]

 And the big hotel on a busy street
 Where waiters brought them things to eat.
 How they rang for bell boys, just for fun,
   To give them a quarter and see them run;
     And the fun they made in vaudeville;
       Children are laughing about it still.

[Illustration]

 And the bargain sale; TEDDY-G got lost;
 And the things they bought and what they cost;
 And their trip to Niagara Falls that night,
 And what they thought of Niagara’s height,
 And the picnic boys and the boating stunt
 When they shot the rapids in a punt;
 And how the boys made cheering go
 When the train pulled out for Buffalo.

[Illustration]

 The story tells of their further jaunt
   And of TEDDY-G at a restaurant;
     How he missed his train and lost his mate;
     For TEDDY-B had risen late;
   And the jolly crowds the bears to greet
 To cheer them all along the street

[Illustration]

 As they rode from station to Common green
 In Boston town like king or queen;
 And of the home on Beacon Hill
 Where Priscilla Alden and her brother Will
 Entertained them gladly days and nights
 While they were seeing the Boston sights.

[Illustration]

 But the things they did in Boston town
 Are done in picture and written down
 In Volume One by Teddy’s paw,
 The jolliest book you ever saw.
 It tells how they captured Bunker Hill
 And worked like soldiers with stubborn will;
 And how they got lost in Boston squares
 Where criss-cross streets run everywheres;

[Illustration]

 And the time they had at Plymouth Rock
 When trying to make forefathers talk;
 And the auto ride to Lexington
 Which nearly cost them all their fun,
 For TEDDY-G would chauffeur be
 And he ran that car like sixty-three;
 It didn’t run; he made it sail
 And landed himself and his mate in jail.

[Illustration]

 The story tells of their Harvard tricks,
 Where they got themselves in another mix
 In getting degrees, a double-L-D,
 Which didn’t fit well on TEDDY-G;
 It tells about the talking machine,
 The funniest thing they had ever seen;

 How they danced a two-step and sang as well
       And heard Uncle Josh his stories tell;
             It tells of the time when they went to see
                       Where the Boston patriots made good tea
                           In seventeen hundred and sixty-three;

[Illustration]

 And then of their sail in a little skiff,
 And how a storm hit them a biff
 And sent them out on the ocean wide,
 Half-way across to the other side;
 And how at noon there came in sight
 A tower of ice all glistening white;

[Illustration]

 And how they met away out, there
 On this iceberg white a polar bear;
 And the stories he told of a northern pole
 Which was never seen by a living soul,
 But it carried a flag both night and day,
 The stars and stripes of the U. S. A.;

[Illustration]

 And the story tells of the rescue made
 And how the steamer crowds hurrahed
 As “Yankee Doodle” the brass band played;
 And then it tells, this jolly book,
 How reporters met them at Sandy Hook
 And asked them questions and pictures took;
 And of New York and its buildings high,
 And how the bears made money fly,
 And dressed in style to see the town,
 To do Fifth Avenue up and down;

[Illustration]

 And the guide they hired, wee Muddy Pete,
 A lad whose home was on the street,
 And his little dog, a terrier white,
 Pete’s boon companion day and night.
 The story tells of the circus show
 Where the two bears helped to make things go;

[Illustration]

 How like heroes of a hundred fights
 The Roosevelt Bears in colored tights
 Stepped in the ring to dance or sing,
 To ride or tumble or anything.

 So these Teddy Bears are here to stay:
 They came from the West one summer’s day
 And journeyed East from town to town
 And gathered fame and much renown.

[Illustration]

 Book Number One (boys know it well)
   The pictures show and the stories tell
     Of how they crossed the U. S. A.
       (And made folks laugh both night and day)
         To New York City, there to be told
           That Teddy Bears in the shops were sold.
             But the bears in the shops are only toys
               Made to please good girls and boys.
                 These Roosevelt Bears, TEDDIES-B and G,
                 Are as full of mischief as you or me;
                 They laugh and talk and sleep and eat
                 And go around on two hind feet
               And ride on cars and wear good clothes;
             And the things they do, dear only knows,
           For they read from books and music play
         And lose themselves nearly every day.
       But the story here and these pictures new
     Tell things about them just as true
   As the things that happened, children say,
 From West to East along the way.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

                                  The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                               put out a
                                  FIRE


[Illustration]

 One day the Bears took trolley rides
 With Muddy Pete and Cribs for guides.
 The car was open; they enjoyed the air;
 They helped the conductor collect the fare,

[Illustration]

 And pulled the bell to start or stop,
 And fixed the trolley pole on top,
     And put on the brakes and rang the gong
     When teams in front didn’t move along.

         But they got in trouble when TEDDY-G
     Climbed on the roof of the car to see
 The working of the electricity.

[Illustration:

  “_But they got in trouble when TEDDY-G climbed on the roof of the car
    to see the working of the electricity._”
]

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “They climbed up ladders in clouds of smoke,
  And lifted hose and windows broke.”
]

[Illustration]

 What it was that hit him he didn’t know,
           But it hit so smart TEDDY-G let go
                       And tumbled off a dozen feet
                             From the trolley top down to the street.

[Illustration]

   The car was stopped; TEDDY-B got out
       To see what the trouble was all about;
       The conductor gave expert advice;
 Muddy Pete replied with words not nice;
 While Cribs stood round as if to say
 “Let us try it again some other day.”
 “The thing that struck me,” said TEDDY-G,
 As he walked to the curb on hand and knee.

 “Struck me all over, outside and in,
 At every place like a prodding pin,
 And burned like fire and did all so quick
 I hadn’t time to learn the trick.”
                 “Let the car go on,” said TEDDY-B,
                         “We’ll stay right here this town to see
                 And get some lunch and look around,
                         And walk up that hill to that college ground,
 And climb that pole on the public square
   And show the children playing there
       That the Roosevelt Bears have been to school
           And know A B C by rote and rule.”

[Illustration]

 “You may go yourself,” said TEDDY-G,
 “And see the town, but as for me,
 I climbed one pole to-day before
 And it left my bones a trifle sore.
 I’ll stay right here and rest a bit
 The several places where I got hit.”
 While thus they talked Muddy Pete and Cribs
 Went off to buy some roasted ribs
 And fried potatoes and muffins hot
 And three cups of coffee in a pot.

                         As they ate their lunch they heard a ring,
 Both quick and loud: ding! ding! ding! ding!
         “A fire! fire!” cried Muddy Pete,
                 And off the four ran down the street.
                         TEDDY-G forgot about electricity
                                 And ran as fast as TEDDY-B.

               They found the fire in a dry goods store
                   And making its way towards three or four
                       Of the largest shops on the busiest street:
                           A clothing house and a store with meat,

 And a great big grocery on the right
   And not a fireman yet in sight.
     The firemen’s hall was across the street
       And in half a minute Captain Muddy Pete

[Illustration]

 Had told some boys that the job was theirs
 And had given orders to the Roosevelt Bears

 About the wagons and reel and hose,
 And hooks and ladders and firemen’s clothes.

[Illustration:

  _Muddy Pete._
]

 “I’ve seen a thousand fires,” said he,
 “And I know this thing from A to Z.
 Slap on those togs: they fit you slick;
 Boost out the reel; get busy quick;

                 Hitch up that rubber to that spouter there;
                     Twist round the stopper and let ’er tear.
                         Hang on to that nozzle, you TEDDY-G,
                             And point it straight at the fire you see.”

[Illustration:

  “_Up to a roof with hose in hand
  And on the ridge to take his stand._”
]

 “Now let ’er go!” and with swishing stroke
     The water struck the fire and smoke.
         In sixty seconds the Roosevelt team
             Were pouring water, a steady stream,
                 On the blazing store and the crowd near-by,
                     Making women run, and children cry.

[Illustration:

  _TEDDY-G._
]

 Captain Muddy Pete took full command
 And told the Bears just where to stand,
 And what to do and where to go,
 And to point the nozzle high or low.

 They climbed up ladders in clouds of smoke,
 And lifted hose and windows broke,
 And carried goods out to the street,
 And burned their ears and scorched their feet.

 They saved two boys from the highest floor
 Who were in a room and had locked the door.
   The wind was blowing both hard and high,
     And it carried fire to roofs near-by.

       TEDDY-G was ordered by Muddy Pete
         To carry a ladder across the street,
           And go up to a roof with hose in hand,
             And on the ridge to take his stand,

               And turn the hose all round about
                 Till every fire he could see was out.
                   And thus they worked like trained firemen
                     Till there wasn’t a spark where the fires had been.

[Illustration:

  _TEDDY-B._
]

 The man that owned the dry goods store
 Took the Bears to his home for an hour or more
 And Cribs and Pete for cream and cake
 And offered them cash which they wouldn’t take.

 He ordered a carriage with coachman swell,
 To take them back to their hotel,
 And promised to print in the local press
 Their pictures large in firemen’s dress.

[Illustration]

 And a full report of the fire that day
         And the things he heard the towns-folk say
                 About bravery shown and the speed they made:
                         Captain Muddy Pete and his fire brigade.

 Said TEDDY-B, in their room that night,
       “One fire a day is enough to fight;
             I’m stiff and tired and burned and sore;
                   I’m going to sleep a week or more,
                         And read in bed and play I’m sick
                               Till I get tired of doing the trick.”

 Said TEDDY-G, as he put out the light,
 “You fought one fire; I had two to fight;
 But I’d rather play with a house afire
 Them fool again with an electric wire.”

               But long before they went to sleep
                   They outlined plans next day to keep:
                       The Hippodrome and the Wax Musee
                               Were things they surely had to see.




[Illustration]

                                  The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                                see the
                               WAX MUSEE


 At eight o’clock the following day
     The postman left, the bell boys say,
         A hundred letters for each Roosevelt Bear,
             From East and West and everywhere:
                 Letters from friends at their mountain glen
                     Telling of trouble with hunting men.

[Illustration]

 A letter from the teacher of the Kansas school
 With sums worked out and giving a rule
 For answering the questions which TEDDY-B
 Had given the class in geography.

 A letter from the farmer where they spent a day
     Asking them sure to return that way.
         It said that the bull which scared them blue
               Would be tied by the nose when they came through.
                   A lawyer wrote demanding cash
                       For the old balloon that went to smash.

[Illustration:

  “_A hundred letters for each Roosevelt Bear, from East and West and
    everywhere._”
]

 A Niagara lad sent local news
     And an envelope filled with Niagara views.
         A sophomore wrote to TEDDY-G
             To ask how he liked his L-D degree.

                 Priscilla Alden sent a little note
                     Which said she was glad their little boat
                         Carried them through the storm so nice
                             And landed them safe on the berg of ice.

[Illustration:

  “_But TEDDY-G went straight ahead, while the machine by TEDDY-B was
    fed._”
]

 Letters in dozens from girls and boys
           Sending them books and candy and toys
                     To give away when they wanted to treat
                                 Deserving lads like Muddy Pete.

 The last letter opened by TEDDY-B
 Was an invitation to the Wax Musee,
 To visit the show that day at three.

             “I’ll hire a machine,” said TEDDY-G,
                 “And answer my mail by electricity.
                     There’s one at work on the floor below,
                         Where you feed in letters and let it go.

 I’ve seen the writing of this machine,
     Like a printed page in blue and green;
         And the girl who owns it said that she
             Would give a typewriting lesson free.”

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “‘Good afternoon,’ said TEDDY-B,
  ‘Is this Buster Brown and Tige I see?’”
]

 Said TEDDY-B, “I’m afraid you’re wrong,
           But if you want to try I’ll go along.”
                     So down they went to try their luck
                               At printing letters like a book.

 The girl was out; the machine was there;
       TEDDY-G sat down on the little chair
             And started in with all his might
                   To pound the keys and make them write;
                         While TEDDY-B at every call
                               Fed in a letter, envelope and all.

[Illustration]

 “This machine writes Greek,” said TEDDY-B,
     As he picked up the letters the type to see;
         “At least the language is new to me:
 Chicago is spelled without a C,
 And Boston has neither S nor T;

 And Priscilla Alden would make you sick,
 She’s like a problem in arithmetic;
 And that Kansas teacher is doing some tricks
 With question marks and the figure 6;

 And that farmer man, no one will blame
 If he shoots us both when he sees his name.
 You wrote this lawyer about the old balloon
 In dollar signs enough to buy the moon.”

 But TEDDY-G went straight ahead
 While the machine by TEDDY-B was fed
 Until every letter that both Bears had
 Was answered some way, good or bad.

 ’Twas three o’clock when they left to see
 The mysteries of the Wax Musee.

[Illustration]

 They found Buster Brown in the entrance hall
 And a cat climbing up the building wall
 With Tige below looking up at puss
 And Buster’s mother trying to stop the fuss.
   “Good afternoon,” said TEDDY-B,
     “Is this Buster Brown and Tige I see?”
       (Tige gave Buster a knowing wink
         Which put him wise and made him think.)

[Illustration]

 “The Roosevelt Bears! I’ve heard of you;
 TEDDY-B and G! How do you do!
 You’re the jolliest bears I ever saw.”
     And Buster shook each by the paw
     While Tige seemed glad that he was near
     And put on a smile from ear to ear.

[Illustration]

 “You come with us,” said Buster Brown,
 “We know this place, upstairs and down;
 There are people here in smiles and tears
 Who haven’t changed for a hundred years.
 We’ll make those laugh who look so sad
 And the merry ones we’ll make them mad.”

[Illustration]

 But Buster’s mother made him stay
 Right where he was in wax and clay;
 And Tige looked round for a place to hide
 As the Roosevelt Bears passed on inside.

[Illustration]

 They saw the eagle which stole the child
   And carried it up in the mountains wild.
     They stopped for a moment to see the King
       And to ask Madame Patti if she would sing.

[Illustration]

 They saw Emperor William in a soldier suit,
       But to all their questions he was deaf and mute;
               So TEDDY-G, to make him look gay,
                   Turned the tails of his moustache the other way.

 At the Roman Forum, TEDDY-B spoke out
         And asked Mark Antony what ’twas all about:
                 This Roman crowd and Cæsar slain
                         And why they were doing the thing again.

 And thus they went from place to place
           Looking at people of every race
                     And crimes committed and prisoners hung
                               And no complaint from any tongue.

[Illustration]

 At the lions’ den TEDDY-G was wild;
 A lion had killed a little child:
 “I’ll go right in and smash his face.”
 But a man who was there to guard the place

 Spoke up and said, “That lion in there
 Is not afraid of a Roosevelt Bear;

 He’s made of wax, and that savage look
 He wears all the time like a picture book.”

 But TEDDY-G replied that he,
 If he owned the place, would let folks see
 That lions who did such things as they
 Shouldn’t live at all in wax or clay.

 Then on they went upstairs to guess
     How Ajab played his game of chess.

           Said TEDDY-G, “See if you can
                 Play checkers with this wooden man;
                       And while you play I’ll take off the lid
                             And find out where the man is hid.”

[Illustration:

  “_TEDDY-G looked at him from head to heels, and his side door opened
    to see the wheels._”
]

 Three games were played and TEDDY-B
           Won every one so fast that he
                     Made the wooden eyes flow free with tears,
                               The first time in a hundred years.

 TEDDY-G looked at him from head to heels,
     And his side door opened to see the wheels,
         And the man’s mainspring and his wooden heart
             He examined with care and took apart,
                 But he couldn’t find out high or low
                     How this man of wood made the checkers go.

 TEDDY-B was polite and said “Good-bye;”
     And the man got up and wiped his eye,
           And held out his hand as well ’s he could,
                 (It had several pieces all made of wood)
                       And said, “Your playing was pretty good.”

[Illustration]

 As the Bears passed out of the Wax Musee
               A paper was handed to TEDDY-G
                             Which read like this in printing bold:

 “Resolved, _That mothers should never scold,
 For boys are wax and scoldings stick
 And impressions can’t be rubbed out quick._

 Resolved, _That the world was made for play,
 And that boys and bears should have their way,
 When fun is needed the blues to down._”

                               Signed by Tige and Buster Brown.

[Illustration]

[Illustration:

  “_The four took hands to skip and sing and to dance around in a jolly
    ring._”
]

 The four took hands to skip and sing,
 And dance around in a jolly ring.
 Folks crowded near inside and out
 To see what the fun was all about.
 A thousand shoppers on the street
 Paused as they passed the Bears to meet.

[Illustration]

 A speech was asked from TEDDY-B
 As he stepped to the door the crowd to see:
                     “The U. S. boys and girls are ours;
                     They’re made of sunshine, love and flowers,
                     We’re bound with them to scatter blues
                     And we’re here to-day to spread the news.”
 When TEDDY-B these things had said
     He Buster’s Resolution read,
         While Tige and Buster inside the door,
             Became wax again as they were before.




[Illustration]

                                  The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                                 visit
                               WEST POINT


[Illustration]

 The day was fine and the Bears were free
   To take a River boat to see
     The Palisades and Tarrytown
       And to view the Hudson up and down.

[Illustration]

 A request had come from a young cadet
 Of West Point school, whom the Bears had met,
 To dine at the West Point Army Mess,
 And to see the boys in their army dress,
 And to sleep on an army barracks cot,
 And to try their luck at a target shot,

 And to ride bare-backed in the hurdle shute,
 Or to join a band with drum and flute,
 Or to hear good stories of army fights
 After taps are sounded to put out the lights.
 So they sent a wire to the cadet to say
 That they would call that very day.

[Illustration:

  “_To ride bare-backed in the hurdle shute, or join a band with drum
    and flute._”
]

 They made the trip with but one mishap:
         The wind blew off a newsboy’s cap
                 As he walked around on the steamer deck
                         Calling out the news of a railway wreck
 And selling his papers and chewing gum
 To the crowd of tourists “going some.”

[Illustration]

 TEDDY-G made a jump as he saw it go
 And he and the cap went down below.
 Like a diver he struck the water right
 And quick as a wink was out of sight.

 “Man’s overboard,” was called aloud;
 And a cheer went up from the tourist crowd
 As they saw in the water in a little while
 The face of a bear with a pleasant smile.

 The boat was stopped and a rope thrown out,
 And in answer to the captain’s shout
 TEDDY-G called back, “The water’s fine;
 I’ve got the bait; pull in your line.”

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “Dressed and ready for hours of fun,
  With cavalry horse or battery gun.”
]

[Illustration:

  “_Like a diver he struck the water right and quick as a wink was out
    of sight._”
]

[Illustration]

 It didn’t take them long to get
   TEDDY-G on board, all dripping wet;
     The children laughed, he looked so queer,
       With the newsboy’s cap hung on his ear.
               He bowed to tourists left and right
                 And said something about his appetite.
                   He asked the steward to bring on some meals
                       As the steamer band played “Silver Heels.”

[Illustration:

  “_The children laughed, he looked so queer, with the newsboy’s cap
    hung on his ear._”
]

[Illustration]

 At West Point landing the Bears were met
 By a double carriage with the young cadet
 And a cavalry mount to escort them round
 To see the buildings on the ground.
 They drove about for an hour or less,
 Then went to their barrack rooms to dress
 In soldier suits for the evening mess.
 TEDDY-B said he’d be Colonel’s aide
 And inspect the boys on dress parade,
 While TEDDY-G said he’d march or stand
 As leader of the soldier band.

 The parade dismissed and the supper through,
       The Bears had nothing else to do
             But to roll themselves in barrack wraps
                     And to put out the lights at the sound of taps.

[Illustration]

 At reveille at six next day
 They were wide awake and bright and gay
 And dressed and ready for hours of fun
 With cavalry horse or battery gun.

 The boys had fun when TEDDY-B
 Rode a cavalry horse down a shute to see
 How to jump the walls and the hurdles take
 Without a tumble or balk or break.

 The horse was tricky, but the Bear was game
 And he made him clear each thing that came,
 Whether wall or water or brush or bar.
 TEDDY-B would have tried a railway car

 Or a barn or a tree or a load of hay
         Or any old thing that came in his way.
               The finest riding, the officers say,
                     That was done at West Point for many a day.

[Illustration]

 TEDDY-G took his turn at soldier fun
       When he loaded and fired a battery gun.
               He charged in powder and cannon ball;
                       “So simple,” he said, “it’s nothing at all.”

 He asked a cadet his hat to keep
       Till he stepped to the muzzle to take a peep
             To see if the ball was in all right,
                   And if things in front were out of sight.
                         What happened next no one can tell,
                               TEDDY-G was lifted in air a spell

[Illustration]

 And whirled around so quick in space
 He didn’t remember just what took place.
 “I caught that ball, all right,” said he,
 When the officer questioned TEDDY-G;

 “But I don’t like catching balls like that;
 My place I think is at the bat.
 Next time you pitch don’t throw so quick;
 You struck me like a load of brick.”

 Said the officer, “For bravery shown
 We’ll give you a title all your own;
 You can drop your Harvard L and D
 And be known as Colonel TEDDY-G.”

 The boys got out the fife and drum
 And made things all around them hum
 As they marched ahead of the Roosevelt Bears
 In army step down the flight of stairs

 To take the ferry at half-past four
 Across the river to the other shore,
 Where a train was waiting to take them down
 The eastern bank and back to town.

 “Let us go to-morrow,” said TEDDY-G,
 “And a first-class game of baseball see;
 That ball they pitched at West Point school
 Had hardly time enough to cool;
 It struck my paws so fiery hot
 I thought for a minute that I was shot.”




[Illustration]

                                  The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                                  play
                               BASE BALL


[Illustration]

 The Bears were invited by Muddy Pete
 To go with him to an East Side street
 To visit children who never see
 Either grass or field or flower or tree.
 They loaded up like old Saint Nick
 With bundles piled on high and thick;
 Bouquets of flowers for children sick
 And toys and candy for those at play,
 And a hundred other things, folks say,
 Who saw them on the street that day.

 They went around from door to door,
     Where bears had never been before;
       Climbed flights of stairs and bumped their heads
           To cheer up lads who were sick in beds;
               Threw bouquets into windows high,
                   And picked nice toys and let them fly,
                       And candy boxes and twigs of green,
                           Wherever boys and girls were seen.

[Illustration:

  “They loaded up like old Saint Nick, with bundles piled on high and
    thick.”
]

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “TEDDY-B threw the monkey and made him yell,
  And caught him every time he fell.”
]

[Illustration]

 But the jolliest sport of the day began
 When they met an organ-grinder man
 With a monkey trained to act the clown
 And pick up pennies boys throw down.
 TEDDY-G asked the man if he could go
 With his monkey band for an hour or so;
 TEDDY-B said he the troupe would join
 And see that rich folks shelled out coin.

[Illustration]

 He’d give the monkey double pay:
 Five cents an hour for half a day.
 And the organ man may go, said they,
 And join some other kind of play.
 “Or if you’re tired,” the two Bears said,
 “Go home for the day and go to bed;
 We’ll use your organ and monkey clown
 And pay you half a dollar down
 And two dollars more when we are through
 And return your band as good as new.

[Illustration]

 With help from Cribs and Muddy Pete
   We’ll find our way from street to street.”
     This bargain made, the Bears set out
       To give the children round about
         And old folks too along the street
           The funniest kind of music treat.

[Illustration]

 TEDDY-G took the crank and just for fun
 Made marches dance and two-steps run,
 And polkas gallop and waltzes race
 And street-songs step at a lively pace.
 While TEDDY-B climbed up on top
 Of the music-box stood on its prop
 And threw the monkey and made him yell
 And caught him every time he fell.

[Illustration]

 A boy got a drum for Muddy Pete,
         And Cribs danced round on two hind feet,
                 And all five laughed and cheered and sang
                         And made things go with slap and bang.

[Illustration]

 The crowd of children filled the square;
 Five hundred boys and girls were there;
 And scores of men stopped work to see
 The tricks of TEDDIES-B and G
 Nickels enough and quarters too
 And silver dollars, not a few,

 Were collected that day by the players four
 To give a fresh air week down by the shore
 To boys and girls a score or more
 Who had never seen the sea before.

 The afternoon was good and hot
 And the Bears sat down in a vacant lot
 To count their cash and rest their feet
 And eat some lunch with Muddy Pete.

 They returned to the organ-grinder man
 His music-box and collection can
 And his monkey clown and some money too,
 Just as he bargained they should do.

     They gave the monkey an extra dime
             For working two hours over time,
                     And a box of nuts as a special treat,
                             The kind that monkeys like to eat.

[Illustration]

 Seven boys came over to where they sat
 With bags of sand and ball and bat
 And baseball gloves and masks of wire
 And asked if they the Bears could hire.

[Illustration]

 “We’re going to play,” a lad spoke up,
   “The Bowery nine for a silver cup,
     And we’re short two men; good players they;
       But they couldn’t come to the game to-day.”

 “And the Bowery nine,” another said,
 “Are bigger boys by half-a-head,
 And good at bat and quick to run;
 They beat us last time two to one.”

[Illustration]

 “They don’t play fair,” said another lad,
 “They count all balls both good and bad;
 They claimed a foul when I made a base
 And when I objected they slapped my face.”

[Illustration]

 “The Bowery nine,” said TEDDY-B,
   “Is the kind of nine I’d like to see;
     We’ll join the team and run the game
       And win that silver cup just the same.”

 “Give me some pointers,” said TEDDY-G,
 “This game you play is new to me.”
 The Bears were coached in every rule
 And they both caught on like boys at school.

[Illustration]

 The Bowery boys, in a little while,
   Came on the lot in baseball style.
     They read off rules to the other nine
       And helped lay out the diamond line.

         In size, they said, among themselves,
           These Roosevelt Bears are number twelves;
             But the Bowery captain bet his hat
               That neither Bear could pitch or bat.

 “This game,” he said, “is as good as won;
           We’ll beat those fellows ten to one.”

[Illustration]

 A Bowery boy went to the bat
         While the other eight on some lumber sat
                     To watch the play and wait their turn
                               And see the Bears their fingers burn.

 TEDDY-B as catcher in mask and pad
       Met every ball both good and bad
                 With snap and skill so sure and quick,
                           He seemed to know the baseball trick;

[Illustration]

 While TEDDY-G at the pitcher’s box
         Put balls to bat like hammer knocks

[Illustration]

 And with curves so neat and twists so new
   The fielders hadn’t a thing to do;
     For not a boy could make a hit
       And one by one the plate they quit.
 Said Muddy Pete, “Their cake is dough”
   As he marked the score, a great big O.
     “It’s our turn now,” said TEDDY-B,
       “We’ll let those Bowery fellows see
 That the team that wins this game to-day
   Will make their score by honest play.”
     And of all the batting that was ever done
       In games that lost or in games that won,
 In timing hits and in making base,
   And in running home in the wildest race,
     This play that day of the Roosevelt Bears
       Beat baseball records everywheres.

 They knocked that ball so hard and high
       Above the clouds up in the sky,
             That while it tarried out of sight
                   The Bears went round with all their might

[Illustration]

 And scored so fast for that silver cup
 That Muddy Pete could scarce keep up.
           Nine innings each they didn’t get,
           For the Roosevelt Bears would be batting yet
                     If the Bowery boys hadn’t stopped the score
                     At naught for them to sixty-four.




[Illustration]

                                  The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                               arrive in
                              Philadelphia


 The Bears went out to a country place
           To see a machine take its trial race;
                     Invented by a New Jersey man
                               And made to fly on a novel plan.

[Illustration]

 This trial trip was to prove that day
 That machines that fly have come to stay.
 When the hour arrived to cut the cord
 There wasn’t a man who would go aboard.
 The Bears said they would make the trip
 And every racing record whip
 If they only knew how to steer the ship.
 “We’ve sailed before,” said TEDDY-B,
 “We hit Chicago down a tree
 From an old balloon that brought us there
 From a Missouri town at a county fair.”
 “I’m not afraid,” said TEDDY-G,
 “I’d like to go to the moon to see
 If the man up there charges entrance fees
 And what he does with all the cheese.”

 But as they talked the machine got wise
   And with buzz and whiz it began to rise
     And broke the ropes that held it tight
       And went towards the clouds and out of sight
         With TEDDY-B and TEDDY-G
           Grabbing at anything they could see:

[Illustration]

 The one on a bar beneath the sail
   And the other on a rope to make a tail.
     They started so quick and went so high
       They hadn’t a chance to say good-bye.

[Illustration]

 They had ridden before and lively too,
         On cow-boy horses and in frail canoe;
                 In an old balloon and a ’mobile car,
                         But this ride that day beat those by far.

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “‘We’ve sailed before,’ said TEDDY-B,
  ‘We hit Chicago down a tree.’”
]

[Illustration]

 They went over town and farm and creek
 In one straight line like a lightning streak,
 And it wasn’t forty minutes when
 They came in sight of William Penn
 Looking so wise and straight and tall
 On the top of Philadelphia’s city hall.
 TEDDY-B called out from where he sat,
 “There’s a man ahead; I see his hat;
 His hand is out; he means to try
 To catch the rope as we go by.”
 And TEDDY-G in cow-boy style
 Let out the rope, nearly half a mile,
 And as it coiled he pulled with might
 And William Penn he lassoed tight.
 A crowd of children down below
 Looked up and saw the Bears let go
 And come from the clouds like sailors bold,
 With not a thing but the rope to hold,

[Illustration]

[Illustration:

  “_They came from the clouds like sailors bold, with not a thing but
    the rope to hold._”
]

[Illustration]

 And land all right on the old man’s hat,
 Where both sat down to have a chat
 And look about and view the town
 And ask each other how they’d get down.

[Illustration]

 They looked over the brim to see Penn’s face
 And ask him questions about the place:

 What would happen if they should fall?
 And how long it took to build the hall?

 And what it cost and if he thought it nice
 To pay so much for expert advice?

 And one thing sure they’d like to know
 Why this Quaker town was considered slow?

 A crowd soon gathered round the square;
 Police and engineers were there,

 And business men and children too,
         And each one wondering what to do;
                 For how to get the two Bears down
                         Was soon being asked by half the town.

[Illustration]

 The Mayor came out with megaphone
         And called aloud up the tower of stone
                 And promised Father Penn a dime
                         If he’d give the Bears a high old time.

[Illustration]

 Not very far from where they sat
 A door was opened in the Quaker hat
 And a man put out his head to say
 That the Roosevelt Bears could come that way,
 But the door was small and it wouldn’t do
 For neither Bear could be crowded through.

 Said TEDDY-B, “Go to the street
 And bring a rope six hundred feet
 And William here will hold one end
 While we to the square below descend.”

   This plan was tried and in half an hour
     The Bears had landed from the tower
       And had shaken hands right then and there
         With every child around the square.

           From there they went, the papers say,
             To a Broad Street bank to draw their pay,
               Or to cash a check which TEDDY-G
                 Had got in New York as their circus fee.

[Illustration]

                   When they asked for money the man inside
                     Said, “You’ll have to be identified:
                     Perhaps your names are what you say,
                     But prove it you must some other way.”

                     “Is that check good?” said TEDDY-B,
                     “Well, if it is, I’ll let you see
                     That G is he and B is me.”
                     But before he had time to act the bear
                     The check was taken and the cash was there.

                     To a shop they went on Chestnut Street
                     And dressed up new from head to feet
                     And got the bill and paid the fee
                     And started out the town to see.

[Illustration]

         Two little lads named Jack and Will
       Had bought four tickets for vaudeville;
     Four seats up front at a children’s show
   That was given to help poor boys to go
 To a training school where men are paid
 To teach young lads a useful trade.
 The boys had heard of the Roosevelt Bears
 And they spent their money for the extra chairs
 That very day on Chestnut Street
 To give the Bears this special treat.

[Illustration]

     The boys had followed the Bears a square,
     Intending to ask if they would care
 To use up their time that day to go
 With two little lads to the children’s show.
 Jack was bravest and walked close behind
 To see if the Bears were really kind.
 “You speak to TEDDY-B,” said he,
 “And I’ll put the question to TEDDY-G.”
     “All right!” said Will, and he stepped ahead
     And this to TEDDY-B he said:

[Illustration]

 “Mr. TEDDY-B, will you come with me
 Right now a children’s show to see?
 I have your ticket; it’s paid for too;
   I bought it specially for you.”
     “That was good of you; of course I’ll go,”
       Said TEDDY-B, “to the children’s show;
         We’re here to make the jolliest kind
           Of fun for every child we find.”
 “Me too,” said Jack; ’twas all he said;
 His courage wasn’t in his head;

[Illustration:

  “_But TEDDY-G to answer Jack lifted him high up on his back._”
]

[Illustration]

 But TEDDY-G to answer Jack
 Lifted him high up on his back
 And danced a jig right then and there

 To show the crowd that a Roosevelt Bear
 For serious people didn’t care;

 They lived for fun and their fun they’d share
 Free of expense and everywhere.

[Illustration]

 But the things that happened to Jack and Will
 That afternoon at vaudeville

 Were not on the program of the children’s show;
 For the Roosevelt Bears, folks say who know,

 Made the biggest hit of their lives that day
 And put up an afternoon of play
 The like of which was never seen
 By old or young, by king or queen.




[Illustration]

                                  The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                               entertain
                         PHILADELPHIA CHILDREN


[Illustration]

 The theatre chairs were filled with fun,
 For a boy or girl was in every one
 Except the four which Jack and Will
 And the Roosevelt Bears had come to fill.

 The band was playing the latest air
 And laughing children everywhere
 As the Bears walked down the central aisle
 In their summer suits cut Philadelphia style.

 They looked so jolly and smiled so sweet
 That the children clapped and stamped their feet
 And waved their hands and stood on chairs
 And cried “Hurrah for the Roosevelt Bears!”

 But the Bears were large and the seats were small
 And they found they couldn’t sit down at all;
 So they stood in the aisle to view the crowd,
 And thus spoke TEDDY-B out loud:

[Illustration]

 “Young ladies and gentlemen; children dear;
 And chairman too, if there is one here,

 TEDDY-G and I have come to stay,
 To hear you laugh and to see the play,

 And since we can’t very well sit down
 We’ll go on the stage and help the clown,

 And stand and sit on wall or floor
   And do some tricks we have done before,
     And some quite old and some quite new,
       And keep it up till the show is through.”

[Illustration]

 The children called for TEDDY-G,
 But he shook his head and said that he
 Could sing a song or dance a jig,
 Or sit on chairs either small or big,

 Or talk to girls or with them dine,
 But to make a speech wasn’t quite his line.

 The speeches through, a theatre page
 Took the two Bears back upon the stage.

 As the curtain rolled up to the top
   A man at the back asked the Bears to stop:
     “Two clowns are on the stage,” said he,
           “They have started their piece and I’ll let you see
           That you can’t interrupt or make a noise
           Or you’ll spoil this show for these girls and boys.”

 “Your advice is right,” said TEDDY-B,
 And out they went the clowns to see.
 The clowns were scared when they saw the Bears
                   Step up behind them unawares,
                     And they ran for doors at left and right
                       And as quick as wink were out of sight.

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “As Dublin Mike and Pat from Cork,
  They came on the stage to look for work.”
]

[Illustration]

               But they were ordered back to earn their fee
                   And to take a turn with TEDDIES-B and G.
                       And from that hour the play went smart
                           For the two bears helped in every part.
 They made those two clowns march and sing,
   Jump over chairs and through a ring,
     And climb up poles and ride a wheel
       And do a clog-dance, toe and heel.
         And when they finished amid loud applause
           The Bears ran off on all four paws
             With the clowns on backs with jolly noise
               Throwing kisses back to girls and boys.
 The orchestra played “A Boy called Taps”
 And then appeared a troupe of Japs:
 A dozen little men in tights,
 The heroes of a hundred fights.

 For a little while the Bears stood by
     And watched the Japs their muscles try,
         And saw them balance balls and bricks
             On parasols and billiard sticks,
                 And climb up ladders out of sight
                     And fall again and land all right.

 Then TEDDY-B said he’d like to do
     A Western schoolboy trick he knew.
         He made the Japs stand in a row
             And take hold of hands and not let go.
                 Then he caught one end and with whirling clip
                     He showed them how to crack the whip.

 The Japs went whizzing in the air
     And whirled in circles everywhere;
         But they did the trick so smart and neat
             That every Jap lit on his feet.

 A man with hoops was next to play
     And he asked if TEDDY-G would stay
         And help him show the boys and girls
             How wooden hoops were taught their twirls.
                 But this trick with hoops put TEDDY-G
                     In so many circles he couldn’t see.

[Illustration]

 They came flying at him through the air
         And rolling in from everywhere;
                     And try his best he couldn’t throw
                                     A single hoop and make it go.

[Illustration]

 He was hooped around from head to paw,
         The funniest sight you ever saw;
                 But he enjoyed the fun and said that he
                         Wore rings enough that day for three.

[Illustration]

 But the jolliest thing that day was when
     The two Bears dressed as Irishmen:
         A Dublin Mike and a Pat from Cork
             Came on the stage to look for work;
                 TEDDY-G as Mike with workman’s hod
                     And TEDDY-B as Pat from Blarney sod;

 With blackthorn sticks their foes to hit,
         And filled to the brim with Irish wit.
                 Their Irish brogue in joke and song
                         Made the children laugh both loud and long.

[Illustration]

 The last part of the show that day
   Was sleight of hand, the programs say,
     But why it failed to work out well
       The man who tried it couldn’t tell.

                                 A trunk was brought, a solid mass,
                               With iron locks and bound in brass.
                             The Bears were asked to get inside;
                           The trunk was locked and with rope was tied
 And the man announced that at his command
         He’d slide a curtain and there would stand
                 The Roosevelt Bears outside and free
                         With the trunk unlocked by any key.

[Illustration]

 But it didn’t work; the Bears weren’t there,
 And it gave the man a little scare

 To find he couldn’t do the trick,
 And the trunk was unlocked pretty quick

 For fear they’d smother for want of air,
 But the Bears had gone no one knows where.

 The trunk was empty; not as they feared;
         The Roosevelt Bears had disappeared.
                 The Bears had gone, but no one knew
                         Just where to look or what to do.

 Detectives hunted high and low
     And questioned folks who ought to know,
         And listened for the slightest sound
             And hunted rooms beneath the ground,
                 And through the halls walked round and round,
                     But not a trace of the Bears they found.

[Illustration]

 At supper-time at home that night
     The boys and girls told of their flight;
         And the jokes they cracked and tricks they played
             And the jolliest kind of fun they made.
                 And how they saw them locked and tied
                     So tight and fast that children cried.

 Some little girls and wee boys too
   Wouldn’t go to bed until they knew
     How TEDDY-B and TEDDY-G
       Got out of the trunk without a key;

                       But their papas told them not to mind,
                     That some one the Bears that night would find
                   And the papers sure the following day
                 Would explain in full how they got away.




[Illustration]

                                  The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                             spend a day at
                             ATLANTIC CITY


[Illustration]

 How the Bears got out of the box that day
 Was never known, the children say;
 But that afternoon, about half-past four,
 They engaged fine rooms on the seventh floor,

 About half-way up and half-way down,
 Of the best hotel there was in town;
 And there they stayed, enjoying a rest

 And eating things the very best,
 And seeing reporters and playing pool
 And learning things not taught in school.

[Illustration:

  “_There they stayed enjoying a rest, and eating things the very
    best._”
]

 Said TEDDY-B one morning bright,
 After spending a hot and sleepless night:
 “The weather’s warm and sticky too
 For fellows dressed like me and you;
 I move we take a little run
 Down to the shore for some ocean fun.

             I’ve heard it said that the bathing there,
             With sandy bottoms everywhere,
             Is quite a fad with men of wealth,
             Who go there simply for their health.”

                       “My health is good,” said TEDDY-G;
                       “And I’ve wealth enough for you and me;
                       But if bathing’s fun, that’s what I need;
                       My health consists of fun and feed.”

 So off they went that very day
 To try Atlantic City spray

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “Across the sand in running dash,
  They struck the breakers with a splash.”
]

 They took a ferry to Camden town
     And got a train which shot them down
         Across New Jersey and to the sea
             So quick they scarce had time to see

[Illustration]

 The porter boy who brushed their clothes
 And told them that hotels in rows
 Lined every street and the ocean front
 So thick they wouldn’t have to hunt.

 And bathing houses, a score or more,
 He said they’d find them near the shore.
 They walked the boardwalk to and fro
 And took a peep at every show;

 They heard bands play and auctioneers
     Make speeches which reduced to tears
         The crowds of buyers who bargains sought
             But didn’t need the goods they bought.

[Illustration]

 They took a turn with a wheeling chair
           Of double size, to fit a bear,
                     With TEDDY-B, the lazy kind,
                               And TEDDY-G, the man behind.

 A palmist read their paws to see
       How long they’d live and what would be
             Their fortunes in the years to come
                   When as millionaires they’d be going some.
                         They saw the fish-haul on the pier
                               And the loaded net with fishes queer.

[Illustration]

 They rode the donkeys on the sand
 And held some children by the hand
 While rides they took on donkey back
 And made the bathers clear the track.

     They went below with shivery feel
     In a little boat where the water-wheel
     Went splashing round with all its might
     And pushed their boat into darkest night.

 And then to a boardwalk place they went
     Two colored bathing suits to rent.
         They dressed themselves like thousands more
             Who were walking up and down the shore;
                 And across the sand in running dash
                     They struck the breakers with a splash.

 Of all the fun of every sort,
         Since Columbus sailed from Genoa’s port,
                 That the old Atlantic ever had
                         With ocean bathers, good or bad,

 With buccaneers or pirate crafts,
         Or shipwrecked crews on lonesome rafts,
                 With fishermen in ocean wave,
                         Or boats sent out their lives to save,

[Illustration]

 Or tourists bound for foreign clime
 With dinners upset all the time,
 With ocean fish of every form
 Which swim the same in calm or storm,

 With Admiral Drake or Captain Kidd
 Who stole some gold and got it hid,
 Or with careless boys of whom you’ve read
 Who sometimes fall in over head,—

 This fun the Atlantic had that day,
 Some fifty thousand bathers say,
 Beat every record for a thousand years
 And made waves laugh themselves to tears.

[Illustration]

 For the Roosevelt Bears had nerve and pluck
         And as they faced each wave to duck
                 They plunged right in and got upset
                         Head over paws and awful wet.

[Illustration]

 They took boys out in water deep
 And made them from their shoulders leap;
 And rescued swimmers, four or five,
 And brought them back to shore alive;
 And when they tired of the ocean’s whirls
 They played on the sand with boys and girls,
 And ran and danced and had lots of fun,
 And dried themselves in the mid-day sun.

 When back they went to get their suits,
 To put on trousers, coats and boots,
 Said TEDDY-G from his little house,
 “This bathing suit wouldn’t fit a mouse;
 It’s shrunk all up like a lady’s glove
 And won’t come off by pull or shove.”

                             Said TEDDY-B from the box next door,
                         “Why didn’t you put on three or four?”
                     But TEDDY-G didn’t see the joke
                 And said he’d rip the thing or choke.

 And rip he did from end to end
 In a way no stitch would ever mend.
 “It came off that way both smooth and nice,”
 Said TEDDY-G when he asked the price.

                         They went that night by lucky chance
                     To an ocean pier where a cake-walk dance
                 Was on in style with couples six
             Who knew full well the cake-walk tricks.

[Illustration:

  “_All four danced with toe and paw the smartest cake-walk you ever
    saw._”
]

                 Two pickaninnies won the prize;
             They beat all records for their size;
         And as they did their last encore
     The Roosevelt Bears went on the floor,
 And all four danced with toe and paw
 The smartest cake-walk you ever saw.

     The dancing finished with laugh and cheer
     Then all the children on the pier
     Shook hands with TEDDIES-B and G
     And asked them both to come to see
     A children’s dance, a pretty sight,
     Which they would give the following night.

 But the Bears replied with much regret
 That Philadelphia they had not seen yet;
 They must go back and crackers buy
 To celebrate Fourth of July,
 For they were bound to show the world
 That when stars and stripes were first unfurled

             And liberty rang sweet and loud
         For warriors brave and patriots proud,
   This flag and bell, right then and there,
 Meant freedom for both man and bear.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

                                  The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                             celebrate the
                                 FOURTH


[Illustration]

 TEDDY-G went out the night before
 To Market Street, to a fireworks’ store,
 And bought a load of crackers red,
 And torpedoes round like balls of lead,
 And great big whirlers which you light
 And then run off with all your might,
 And flags and kites and pistol toys:
 The kind to give to little boys;
 And rockets which go whizzing high
 To shoot bright stars around the sky;
 And sticks to hold and turn about
 While balls of fire come popping out;
 And drums to beat and horns to blow,
 And things to shoot and things to throw;
 And small balloons in colors gay
 And a hundred flags to give away;
 In all about twelve dollars’ worth
 To celebrate July the Fourth.

[Illustration:

  _TEDDY-G—His paw_
]

             They didn’t sleep a wink that night
         But started out before ’twas light,
     To historic Independence Square.
 “For that,” said TEDDY-B, “is where
 This western world beyond the sea
 Unfurled the flag of liberty;
 And that’s the place and this the date
 Where loyalty must celebrate.”
 “Oh you come off,” said TEDDY-G,
     “It’s fun that I am here to see;
         Who cares to-day who won the game?
             We’ll shoot off crackers just the same.”
                 And this is how the two Bears talked
                     As down the street to the Square they walked:

[Illustration]

 TEDDY-B of heroes brave and bold
       And things they did in days of old;
             While TEDDY-G just had his say
                   About things to do that very day.

[Illustration:

  _TEDDY-B—His paw_
]

     At the Liberty Bell they took a try
     And hoisted it up good and high
     And rang it out both loud and clear,
     And at every ring there went up a cheer;
     For the only day in all the year
     When the crack doesn’t spoil the tone sent forth
     Is Independence Day, July the Fourth.
   At least that’s what the children say,
 And they know this bell from Z to A.

[Illustration]

 But the fun began with the Roosevelt Bears
 When boys stole on them unawares
 And put a match to TEDDY-G
               In his coat-tail pocket, where, you see,
               He had stored some crackers, a good-sized bunch,
               Along with hard-boiled eggs for lunch.

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “At the Liberty Bell they took a try,
  And hoisted it up both good and high.”
]

 Lickety-split-pat-pit-bang-boo!
       And the coat tail smoked and split in two,
             And hard-boiled eggs shot here and there
                   And the Bear went up and down in air.
                         But he told the lads he didn’t care,
                               That fun might start in anywhere;

 At front or back, in hat or boot,
       Put punk to powder and let it shoot.
             “We are out,” he said, “for fun and noise
                   And when fun is trump, boys will be boys.”
                         And from that hour the lads and he
                               Shared all there was to do or see.

[Illustration]

 They strung a wire from tree to tree,
 And then the fellows with TEDDY-B
 Put crackers all along the wire,
 To prepare the field for an army fire.

 Said TEDDY-G, as he explained the play,
 “We’ll fasten a flag on the wire half-way,
 And you boys under yonder tree
 Who have taken sides with TEDDY-B,

 When I say the word, you put your fire
 At the cracker next you on the wire,

[Illustration:

  _“They strung a wire from tree to tree and then the fellows with
    TEDDY-B
  Put crackers all along the wire, to prepare the field for an army
    fire.”_
]

 While I, if my boys a hand will lend,
     Will put a match to the other end.
         To reach the flag first, that’s the game,
             And the side which wins this piece of fame
                 Wins all the crackers big or small
                     Which haven’t gone off when time I call.

 If on both sides the armies flunk
       Both captains use again their punk.”
             When both the sides the rules did know
                   TEDDY-G called out, “One! two! three! Go!”

[Illustration]

 And at the words two armies shot
 Their cracker guns both quick and hot
 As on they marched along the wire
 In powder smoke and blazing fire.

 The flag was won by TEDDY-G
 And prisoners taken, ninety-three
 Of the finest crackers the others had,
 All not shot off, both good and bad.

[Illustration]

 But this army game was children’s play
           Compared with things they did that day:
                     From noon till night they let things go,
                               In sky above and on earth below,

[Illustration]

 With slap and bang, in smoke and noise,
                   Like any two July Fourth boys.

[Illustration]

 They sent balloons up to the clouds
           And a dozen kites to please the crowds,
                     And then shot rockets just to try
                                     To hit the things up in the sky;
 They dug a hole down in the ground
     And filled it full of crackers round
         And shot them off to hear the sound.

                 They burned their paws and scorched their hair,
             And when darkness came they did their share
         Of firing rockets everywhere,
     And in burning lights, a fiery red,
 Till long past time for going to bed.

[Illustration]

 When the day was o’er said TEDDY-B,
 “Let’s go to-morrow to the Zoo to see
 The animals imprisoned there:
 The elephant and polar bear,
 The lions, tigers, and kangaroos,
 And tell them one and all the news:

 That July the Fourth is the day that we
 Who own and love this country
 Do celebrate in smoke and noise,
 That we may teach our girls and boys
 That this one day of every year
 Is given them free to shout and cheer,

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

 As a safety valve for them and you
             To keep things running square and true.”

 Said TEDDY-G, “I’ll freedom teach
     And try to practise what I preach;
         To-morrow I’ll let out the Zoo,
             The elephants and monkeys too,
                 And the polar bear and kangaroo;
                     They’re just as good as me or you.”

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

                                  The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                               visit the
                                  ZOO


[Illustration]

 Said TEDDY-G, “The thing to do,”
     As they reached the high fence round the Zoo,
       In the early morning, about half-past two,
       “Is to get in there with this load of cake
       Before the keepers are wide awake.”
       “You climb the fence,” said TEDDY-B,
       “And throw this rope back here to me,
       And pull up the baskets one by one
         And we’ll land in there a good-sized ton
           Of the finest cake that was ever made,
             And strawberry tarts and lemonade
             And cherry pie and sugar sticks
             And red ice cream in good-sized bricks
           And peanut candy and chocolate eclairs
         And other things quite new to bears.”

 “Don’t waste your time in telling me;
 I bought these things,” said TEDDY-G;
 And up he climbed, with business sense,
 A tree which grew beside the fence,

[Illustration]

 And out a limb and dropped below
             And called out, “All right; I’m in; let go.”
                         And up went baskets two by two
                                     Over the fence into the Zoo;

[Illustration]

 And before the day began to break
     The Bears had camped with their load of cake
         On a grassy knoll where they couldn’t hide
             And with dens and pens on every side.
                 “We’re in here now,” said TEDDY-B;
                     “What do you say we do?” said he.

 “Let’s feed the animals,” said TEDDY-G;
     “I move we let out two or three
         And bring them here and feed them cake
             And see just how our show will take;
                 And if they are pleased, why we’ll go round
                     And let loose everything on the ground.”

 To the elephant house the two Bears went
         And stirred up the biggest elephant,
                 And marched him over to their cake
                         Before he had time to get half awake.

 “You mind these things,” said TEDDY-G,
 “Our breakfast hour is half-past three.
     If you are good you can have a snack
         To keep you chewing till we come back.”
             And they gave old Bolivar (that was his name)
                 Some things to eat till back they came.

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “‘You mind these things,’ said TEDDY-G,
  ‘Our breakfast hour is half-past three.’”
]

 Then off they went to the monkey cage
 Where monkeys of every size and age
 Were using hands and feet and lungs
 And saying good-morning in a thousand tongues.

 TEDDY-B made them promise they’d be good
 (At least that’s what he understood)
 If he’d open the cage and let them out
 And give them an hour to run about.

 “We have,” said he, “some pie and cake
       Which TEDDY-G will undertake
             To serve out free in an hour or two
                   To every animal in the Zoo.

[Illustration]

 We’ll give you as much as you deserve
 If you’ll act as waiters and help us serve.”
 The monkeys grinned from ear to ear
 And winked at each other a little queer,
 And nodded their heads and seemed to say
 That the two Bears’ orders they’d obey.

 The cage was opened and the crowd went out,
 Little and big, with laugh and shout,
 Upsetting each other across the green,
 The funniest bunch that was ever seen.

[Illustration]

 The Bears went then to the beaver pond

 And told the beavers if they were fond

 Of good ice cream served by baboons

 To bring on their tails to use for spoons.

 They saw some foxes red and gray
 And asked them to dine with them that day.
 The wolves looked hungry and said they’d see
 That all left over was given them free.

                         The rhinoceros couldn’t accept their treat;
                 He had some rheumatics in his feet.
         But in a cage near-by a kangaroo
 Jumped twenty feet when they let him through.

[Illustration]

 An ostrich standing six feet high
                 Called out to the Bears as they went by
                                 To hurry around with a piece of pie.

[Illustration]

 Two mountain goats with curling horn
 Said the mountain crest where they were born,

 Their father rented just for thanks
 To the Roosevelt Bears to play their pranks,

 And this they thought was cause indeed
 Why they should be asked to the morning feed.

 A hedgehog and a porcupine
 Were the next pair asked by the Bears to dine,
 Then a dromedary chewing his cud
 Said he wouldn’t budge from where he stood,

 But if they’d bring him a piece of cake
 He’d see if he liked their kind of bake.

 From there they went to the animals’ cage
         Where they found the tigers in a rage
                 And the lions roaring to beat the band
                         In language the Bears didn’t understand.

[Illustration]

 A chimpanzee came near to see
 And he made a face at TEDDY-G.
 He was eating pie and said he feared
 That their basket lunch had disappeared.

 The Bears took warning and started back
 To find ten keepers on their track,
 And animals both big and small
 Running wild on every mall,
 And Bolivar with his trumpet loud
 Calling for help to stop the crowd.

 The monkeys had gone in a solid bunch
       And captured the whole of the picnic lunch,
             And out on limbs and high up on poles,
                   And on top of roofs and into holes,
                         And every monkey with cake or jam,
                               Or pie or tart or sandwich ham,

 Or nuts or lemonade or cheese;
       And Bolivar shaking poles and trees,
             And hungry wolves and the kangaroo,
                   And mountain goats and a deer or two
                         Running wild from place to place,
                               Helping on the monkey chase.

[Illustration:

  “_The monkeys had gone in a solid bunch and captured the whole of the
    picnic lunch._”
]


 ’Twas noon that day when keepers ten
         And a police brigade of fifty men,
                 And a hundred boys and firemen six
                         Got the monkey troupe to stop their tricks.

 The Bears looked on throughout the show
     And helped on the fun by laughing so
         For TEDDY-G, since he was a cub,
             Or at Bunker Hill down in the Hub,
                 Said that making fun seemed to be his forte
                     And that he never had such lively sport.

 But the keeper made him change his laugh
         When he locked them up with a big giraffe
               And told them to stay and pay a fine
                       When the police court met next day at nine.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

                                  The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                                   go
                                FISHING


[Illustration]

 When the Roosevelt Bears had paid their fine
 For the mischief done and the monkey shine,
 They said good-bye to the big giraffe
 And told him his neck was too long by half;

 And asked the time it took his food
     To reach his body from where he chewed;
         And why he held his head so high,
             And the size of collars he had to buy;

[Illustration]

 And why he was neither round nor square;
   But the old giraffe didn’t seem to care;
     He wagged his tail and winked his eye
       And nodded his head to say good-bye.

 When they quit the Zoo and got outside,
   “Let us take a train for a little ride;
     I’m tired of town and want to see
       A farm or stream,” said TEDDY-B.

 So a train they took without the fare,
     For where it went they didn’t care.
         When “Tickets, please,” the conductor said,
             TEDDY-G began to scratch his head
                 And to think up names of towns he knew,
                     Like Hoboken and Kalamazoo;

 But when “Tickets, please,” he said again,
     TEDDY-G got busy with a ten
         And said, “Take this for your railway pay
             And stop the train some time to-day
                 Where fishing’s good if you go that way.”
                     The conductor asked them questions strange
                         About their plans as he gave them change

[Illustration]

 And slips of paper with holes punched through;
 He said a fishing stream he knew;

 He’d stop the train at any rate
 And show them where to buy some bait
 And fishing poles and hook and line
 And a jolly inn to sleep and dine.

 They reached the place that day at two,
 And said good-bye to the railroad crew,

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “They met a lad on his way from school,
  Whom they stopped to question about a rule.”
]

 And went by a path up a mountain ridge
       As the train went on across a bridge.
             They found the place and got fitted out
                   With six poles apiece both long and stout,
                         And bait enough and lines and hooks
                               To fish a year in a dozen brooks.

 For said TEDDY-G, “If fishing’s play
 Then I want enough, for I mean to stay
 Right by the game for at least a week
 Until every fish that’s in the creek
 Is caught and deemed and cooked and ate
 Or cut up in pieces to use for bait.”
 So down their rods and lines they took
 To the stream below to try their luck.

[Illustration]

                 Of all the fishing that was ever done
                 By Izaak Walton or his eldest son,
         Or by boys who fish with pins for hooks,
         That we read about in the picture books,
 Or for salmon trout which weigh a ton
 That they say are caught in Oregon,

[Illustration]

 Or for shad in the River Delaware,
 Or for pike or black bass anywhere,
 The fish that day caught by the Bears
 Would take first prizes at all the fairs;

 And the way they caught them left and right,
 And the way they coaxed the fish to bite,
 And the way they tossed the fish in air,
 Landing in trees and everywhere,
 And the way they made the chipmunks run,
 The fish, themselves, enjoyed the fun.

 For one fish spoke, vows TEDDY-G,
 A great big pounder, two or three,
 And said he wouldn’t miss the game
 Even if he never lived again.
 “A sport,” he said, “like TEDDY-G,
 Is the kind that fishes love to see.”

[Illustration]

 TEDDY-G got his line caught in a tree
 And climbed up on high to get it free
 When a ’possum called down from above,
 “If you come up here you’ll get a shove

 Which will toss you off and break your head
     And put you fifteen weeks in bed.”
         But TEDDY-G just shook with glee
             And said, “I’ll come right up to see.”
                 The ’possum scared and trembled so
                     He fell off the limb and down below
                         Where TEDDY-B broke an ugly fall
                             By catching him like a rubber ball.

 They fed that ’possum fishes eight
     And gave him hook and line and bait
         And told him stories about the Zoo
             And the things they let the monkeys do.

[Illustration]

 They met a man by the stream that day
       Who has fished for a hundred years they say,
           In ocean, river, creek and pond,
                 And mountain brook and lake beyond,
                       With statesmen bold and actors gay,
                             And farmer lads found by the way.

 He told them stories of fish he’d caught,
       And when fish were few, of fish he’d bought.
             And then had talked of this big land
                   And of men he knew on every hand:
                         The true to love and those to hate
                               Who fish for gain with stolen bait.

 He told them how to have most fun
     When they struck the town of Washington;
       “Because,” he said, “though I’m on the shelf,
         I had some fun there once myself.”

               TEDDY-B said he would like to know
                   How near a Roosevelt Bear could go
                       To the Capitol or Monument
                           Without being shot by the President.

[Illustration]

 But the man replied, “Trout-fishing’s fine,
 But shooting bears isn’t in my line.

 Take my advice and take your gun
 When you turn your steps towards Washington.”

 They shook his hand both long and tight
 And said they’d leave that very night.

 They could get a train, they said, at four
 For Washington and Baltimore.

[Illustration]

 They tramped along a country pike
 And wished for horses, train or bike,
 Till they met a lad on his way from school,
 Whom they stopped to question about a rule
 To multiply and square and add,
 And what teachers did with lessons bad,
 And who made spelling and what ’twas for,
 And the day and hour of the next big war,
 And what athletics were all about,
 And where figures go when you rub them out,
 And why the moon isn’t always round,
 And the difference between a noise and sound,
 And on a fence, how long ’twould take
 To rest an hour or a dinner bake,
 And how things inside the earth were done,
 But the lad couldn’t answer a single one.

 Said TEDDY-G: “If it doesn’t rain,
         And you’ll tell us where to get a train
                 And the fare to pay and how long the run
                         From the place you name to Washington,
 And your age and weight and greatest height,
         And two bears you know that never bite,
             I’ll give you a dollar, quick as wink,
                                 And let you have it before you think.”

[Illustration]

 Though he never learned this dollar trick
 The lad was bright and he answered quick,
 And they said good-bye and it didn’t rain
 Till they stepped on board their Pullman train.

 Said TEDDY-G, as he lit his pipe,
 And bought some apples red and ripe,
 And settled down in an easy seat
 With a resting-place for both his feet,
 “I’m tired of clothes; I’m tired of fun;
 When I see the town of Washington
 I’m off again for the woolly West;
 I like the mountains much the best;
 I want to live as free as air;
 I’m satisfied to be a bear.”

 “But you forget,” said TEDDY-B,
     “That all these things we came East to see
         Were made by the brains of every clime
             To keep folks working all the time.”

 “That’s all right,” said TEDDY-G,
 “They can work ahead, but as for me
 I don’t believe that bears were made
 To be busy always at a trade.”

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

                                  The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                                   in
                               PITTSBURG


[Illustration]

 They were on the train and at their ease
 When the conductor called out “Tickets, please.”
 “We have no tickets,” said TEDDY-G,
 “But cash we have, as you will see,
 And to Washington we want to go
       To see the President and to let him know
       That we are fully satisfied
       That Uncle Sam is tall and wide
       And big around, of mighty girth,
       The greatest show on all the earth;
       His boys and girls are full of fun
       From Omaha to Washington.”

 But the conductor said, “You ought to know
 If to Washington you want to go
 You’ve started wrong; this train you’re on
 Is a Pittsburg special from Washington;
       And to-morrow morning, if we’re not late,
             You’ll be in Pittsburg at half-past eight.”

[Illustration]

 The Bears looked dazed and then looked mad,
 And then they laughed and both looked glad.

 Said TEDDY-B, “Pay up the fares;
 We’ll pass to-morrow as millionaires
 And found a library and put through a deal
 Of high finance in oil or steel.”

 But TEDDY-G didn’t think so far;
 He thought of night and the sleeping car;

 He recalled some cranky things he said
     When they made him sleep in an upper bed
         On a train out West, and the banjo song,
                 And the things they did a little wrong
                     Till both were put right off the train
                             On a Kansas farm in a shower of rain.

 The conductor heard this wise remark:
       “If on this train, when the night is dark,
                 You want this Bear to behave himself,
                         Don’t make him sleep on a Pullman shelf.”

[Illustration]

 But the trip was made without mishap
 And both the Bears enjoyed a nap
 In lower berths till eight o’clock,
 When the porter gave their berths a knock
 And said, “Get up; it’s broad day light;
 The Iron City is now in sight.”

 But things outside looked black as night
 And said TEDDY-B, “Do you mean to say
 That this is Pittsburg and this is day?”

 The man replied, “Get up; that’s smoke;
 Take my advice and when you joke
 About this town, don’t do it loud,
             For Pittsburg people live in a cloud,
             And their ideas about a bear
             May be colored some by Pittsburg air.”
                         “What’s that you say?” called TEDDY-G,
                         “You seem to know your geography,
                         But let me say right here and now,
                         I’ll teach your Pittsburg people how
 To dance and sing, to laugh and joke,
         In mountain air or city smoke,
                   For they must know this very day
                           That Pittsburg too was made for play.”

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “Said TEDDY-B, ‘Pay up the fares,
  We’ll pass to-morrow as millionaires.’”
]

 They took a cab to a big hotel
     Where things are done both smart and swell;
         And breakfast over, TEDDY-B

[Illustration]

 On mischief bent, went out to see
     What the telegraph and phone could do
           To get a crowd their tricks to view.

 He called up schools, every one in town,
             And ordered all the children down
                       To the Old Block House at noon to see
                                     The Teddy Bears teach history.

[Illustration]

 Then on the Mayor he played a lark
       By ordering the police to Schenley Park,
             To be locked up there till after dark;
                   “For,” said TEDDY-B, “the police you know
                         Might spoil our little Block House show.”

 At costume shops each Teddy Bear
 Bought a lot of Indian things to wear.
 They planned at the Old Block House to meet
 At the corner of a near-by street,
                         And from that spot like Indians race
                         And take possession of the place.
                         They did the trick in Wild West style;
                         Their whoops and yells were heard a mile;

[Illustration]

 But the fight was short; no one to scare;
 There wasn’t a soul there anywhere.
 They made the place from roof to floor
                             Like seventeen hundred and sixty-four
                             And put things into shape to fool
                             The boys and girls from every school.

[Illustration]

 The children came, five thousand strong,
 A happy, merry, lively throng;

 The little ones by teachers led
 To study history, they said,

 But the history lesson learned that day
 Was livelier stuff, the fellows say,

 Than most boys learn at public school;
             For it didn’t follow any rule,
                           But just shot off with laughter loud
                                           In every corner of the crowd.

 The Teddy Bears, as Indians brave,
         Did everything but behave:
                   They chased each other round the Block
                             With bow and arrow and tomahawk;

[Illustration:

  “_They chased each other round the Block with bow and arrow and
    tomahawk._”
]

 They climbed to the roof and danced a jig
     And called to children small and big
         To catch the arrows every time
             And bring them back and get a dime;
                 And then to finish up the sport
                     They asked the boys to take the fort:
                         The boys to be the soldiers bold
                             And they as Indians the place to hold.

 In this the boys came out ahead;
         The Bears pretended they were dead,
               While the boys to do the thing up well
                     Sent two dead Bears to the hotel.
                           In half an hour they lived again
                                 And were out on bicycles for a spin;

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

 This time to see men making steel,
 And in Highland Park to have a wheel,
 And to see the Zoo and the Bridge of Sighs,
 And Luna Park, where they won the prize.

 In the afternoon they put up a lark
 At the entrance gate of Highland Park.
 A little lad who flew a kite
 Had got the string caught good and tight
 On the entrance post when TEDDY-G
 Climbed up the post and said that he
 Would untie the knot and start the kite
 Up to the sky and out of sight.

 A rope was lying twirled around
 Where workmen left it on the ground,
 And TEDDY-G as quick as wink
 And before the men had time to think
 Caught up the rope and made it tight
     From post to post, from left to right,
         And out he went like a circus clown
             And whirled around, head up and down,
                 And walked the rope and made more play
                     Than folks had seen for many a day.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

 At six o’clock they said good-bye
           To busy streets and smoky sky
                   And to boys and girls for the day of fun
                             And started back towards Washington.

 Said TEDDY-B, as a town they passed
       Where furnaces made fiery blast,
             “I’d rather be a Teddy Bear
                   Than stand that heat and work in there;
                   But this old world was made, they say,
                   So that men would work and bears could play.”




[Illustration]

                                  The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                               get out a
                               NEWSPAPER


[Illustration]

 When the station clock was striking four
 The Bears got off at Baltimore.
 They met a newsboy on the street
 Who said the newsboys were to meet
 That night at six in a nook of theirs
 And they’d like to have the Teddy Bears
 Drop in and help them plan and think
 How best to earn some extra chink.
 Said TEDDY-B, “I’d like to walk
 Around to your club and hear you talk
 And make a speech and help along
 With dance or story, trick or song.”
 “You ought to know,” the lad replied,
 “That some months ago a newsboy died.
 That night his papers didn’t sell
 And he had no home; no one to tell
 How cold he was and hungry too,
 And he just died; was frozen through.
 We mean to give a newsboys’ show
 To buy a home where the boys can go.”

[Illustration:

  “_They met a newsboy on the street who said the newsboys were to meet
    that night at six in a nook of theirs._”
]

 This story stirred up TEDDY-G,
 “You leave that show to me,” said he,
 “I’ll use my wit from nose to paw
 To make more cash than you ever saw.”
 “I have a plan,” said TEDDY-B,
 “Let us run a paper just to see
 If our sheet won’t sell like sixty-three.
           We’ll fill each page with jolly stuff
           And give the boys the greatest puff.
           We’ll reuse the price and earn the pay
           To build that home in half a day.”
 So off they went to try their hand
 At a job they didn’t understand:
 To edit, proof-read, print and sell
 A newspaper and do it well.

[Illustration]

 The publisher took them all about
 To show how a paper is gotten out.
 They questioned every man they met
 And with the manager made a bet
 That they could put each page in rhyme
 And get the paper out on time.
 The bet was taken; the job was theirs;
 A paper run by Teddy Bears
 And they to have their own sweet way
 With news and ads for a single day.
 They said they’d do the best they could
 And make a sheet that was bright and good.

[Illustration]

 Of all the orders boys ever hear
       Who work on papers all the year,
             The orders given to the boys that night
                   Beat every record out of sight.
                         They made the editors fume and frown,
                                And reporters chase all around the town,

[Illustration]

 And telegraph instruments click in chime,
           And telephone bells ring all the time,
                     And linotypes go double speed
                               And set up type big enough to read,
 And advertisers fight for space,
         And presses go at double pace,
                 And everything hum on every floor
                         To beat all “scoops” ever made before.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

 But the paper was out on time next day:
           The greatest paper, newsboys say,
                     That was ever printed in all the land
                               By the fastest press or done by hand.

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “When Teddy Bears would rulers be,
  And hunt for men in cave or tree.”
]

[Illustration]

 They had floods and fires, and earthquakes, too;
 And kings beheaded and discoveries new,
 And ships upset and railroad wrecks,
 And ten millionaires break their necks;
 And the sun eclipsed at twelve at night,
 And Japan start up another fight;
 And Russia move clean off the earth,
 And an elephant sleep in an upper berth;
 And Niagara Falls turn upside down,
 And the President wear a golden crown;
 And ten feet of snow right in July,
 And a man discovered nineteen feet high;
 And robberies eight and murders ten,
 And mosquitoes kill ten thousand men;
 And a Wall Street smash, the worst in years,
 That made the bulls and bears shed tears;

[Illustration]

 And Robinson Crusoe come back to life
 And land in Baltimore with a wife;
 And little Bo Peep who lost her sheep
 Sold at auction mighty cheap;
 And the money hid by Captain Kidd
 Found in a box without a lid
 By a colored boy in the Isle of Wight
 A hundred thousand dollars bright.
 A diamond mine they said was found
 On Charles Street above the ground,
 They had boys at school their lessons know,
 In headlines deep a foot or so;
 And all the girls in the world combine,
   To go to bed at half-past nine,
     Or if rules they broke to pay a fine.
       And ending up on the final page
         A prophecy of a future age

[Illustration]

 When Teddy Bears would rulers be
 And hunt for men in cave or tree
 With guide and gun, with horse and hound,
 In a Colorado hunting ground.
 The advertisements made that night
 Were what the printers call a fright:
 All shoved together, old and new,
 Upside down and wrong side too,
 Grocers had hats and caps for sale,
 And tailors eggs, and barbers ale,
 And department stores had railroad ads,
 And big hotels sold writing pads,
 And music stores sold soap and tea,
 And theatres said admission free,
 And a jeweller, the best in town,
 Offered cheap a wedding gown.
 A private school sold cheese and lard,
 And furniture was offered by the yard.
 When TEDDY-B saw what was done
 He said he thought ’twould make good fun.
 “For we mean,” said he, “to sell our sheet
 And every record sale to beat.”

[Illustration]

 The papers sold at first for ten,
 But when approved by business men
 The price went up on every hand;
 And with papers in such brisk demand
 You couldn’t get a single sheet
 By ten o’clock upon the street.
   The money made for the boys that day
     Bought them a home with grounds to play
       And enough to spare to give each lad
         The jolliest time he ever had:
           A fresh air week down by the sea
               With candy, cake and soda free.

 The Bears were glad when their work was done
         To start for the town of Washington,
                   To see the President and shake his hand
                           And then go home, as they had planned.

[Illustration: _Not in to callers; we’ve gone to bed. Signed Teddy B.
Teddy G._]




[Illustration]

                                  The
                            Roosevelt Bears
                                 visit
                               WASHINGTON
                  and complete their Tour of the East


[Illustration:

  “_Dee-lighted._”
]

 When the Bears arrived in Washington
     They set out at once to buy a gun.
         They bought three guns and pistols ten
                   And suits and belts like fighting men.
                       When dressed complete then off they went
                       To the house where lives the President.
                       When they reached the grounds and the entrance
                          gate
                       No one was near to make them wait.
                       The news had spread round everywheres
                       Of this visit planned by the Roosevelt Bears.
                       A policeman dodged behind a tree
                       When he got first sight of TEDDY-B.
                       Detectives wise with eagle eye
                       Didn’t stop to ask the reason why,
                       But ducked their heads behind a wall
                       And got under cover one and all.
                       A doorkeeper in gold and black
                       Said, “Wait a minute till I come back.”

[Illustration]

 And lawyers bold and statesmen brave
     Who make the President behave
         Moved out of sight as quick as wink;
             To offer help they didn’t think;
               But they were hunters just the same,
                   Though hunting bears wasn’t quite their game.

 The boys who answer the call of bells
       Lost all the breath they use for yells
                 In crossing lawns in serious fright;
                             They rein for home with all their might.

 And secretaries, three or four,
 Got under desks down on the floor
 When they saw the Bears at the entrance door.

                           But one little lad who was playing round
                   When he saw the Bears, he stood his ground
           And stepped up bravely to TEDDY-G
 And said, “Who is it you want to see?”

[Illustration]

 Said TEDDY-G in his kindliest way,
 “We have traveled East and have come to-day
 To see the hunter who doesn’t scare
 And who isn’t afraid of man or bear.”

 The Bears by the lad were keenly eyed,
 And he said as he beckoned them both inside:
 “My Dad’s in here; but wipe your feet;
 I think you’re the kind he likes to meet.

 They stepped inside, and the man they saw
 Looked them over from head to paw
 And with outstretched hand and smiling face
 He gave them welcome to the place.

[Illustration]

 Said TEDDY-G, when he caught his breath,
 I thought this call meant certain death.
 We armed ourselves with loaded gun
 When we struck this town of Washington,
 For here ’twas said we’d surely see
 The man who chased bears up a tree
 And with both eyes shut on darkest night
 Could hit a bear and win a fight.”

 “To stand your ground,” said TEDDY-B,
 “Is the thing that we Bears like to see;
 If fighting’s trump or simply fun,
 We stand, eyes front, and never run;
 But those men of yours who guard your fort
 Should be taken West for a little sport
 And taught the things you learned out there
 When climbing mountains chasing bear.”

 But he simply laughed at what they said
 And joked of stories he had read
 In newspapers of things they’d done
 On their journey East to Washington.
                           They talked away for an hour or two
                           Of hunting trips and friends they knew,
                           And this country wide and its cities great
                           From Boston Hub to the Golden Gate.
 The Bears were asked to come next day
         At an early hour to have a play
                 On the White House grounds and in children’s tent
                         And to breakfast with the President.

[Illustration]

 This visit o’er they started out
 To see the buildings all about:
 The Capitol with its rounded dome
 Where the U. S. Senate makes its home,
                           And congressmen from every State
                           Gather in halls to deliberate;
                           The Treasury with its vaults of gold,
                           As much as a dozen trains could hold,

[Illustration]

 And silver too, and crisp bank notes
         Enough to load a hundred boats;
                 The Library with its pictured halls
                           And books stored high within its walls;

 The gardens with their trees and flowers,
       And a museum where they stayed for hours;
           And last of all, built straight and high,
                 A shaft that stands against the sky,
                         Set off with stones which good friends sent
                                 In memory of a president.

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Edward Stern & Co., Inc.

  “With outstretched hand and smiling face,
  He gave them welcome to the place.”
]

[Illustration]

 TEDDY-G said he would like to see
 That famous little cherry tree
 And get some cherries red and sweet
 To take back home to give a treat
 To the big raccoon and the mountain goat
 And the old cougar and the young coyote,
 To make them square and help them try
 To tell the truth and not to lie.

[Illustration]

 So off they went that day at three
 Out in the country the farm to see
 Where George’s father used to stop
 And where the boy learned how to chop.
                     They found the place as the guide books said
                     And the cherry stump, but no cherries red;
                     The stump was there and the hatchet too
                     And neither looking very new.

                     Said TEDDY-B when these things he saw
                     And took the hatchet in his paw:
                     “Of all the shrines of history
                     Which you and I came East to see
                     This spot right here I say is trump;
                     This hatchet and this cherry stump.”

                     TEDDY-G said he would like to try
                       Little George’s axe on a tree near-by,
                         To prove to the world that he could do
                           A trick like that and own up too.
                     And chop he did an apple tree
                     And left a note where all could see,
                     “This tree was chopped by TEDDY-G.”

[Illustration]

 They breakfasted the following day
     With the President and had their play
         For an hour before, from early dawn,
               With boys and girls upon his lawn.
                       They asked the President if he
                       Would come out West their home to see;
                       Said TEDDY-B, “We’ll treat you white
                       And put you up both day and night
 With grizzly bears and panthers wild
     And give you sport not quite so mild
         As driving Congress with its load,
               Or riding horseback down the road.”

[Illustration]

 “This strenuous life,” said TEDDY-G,
 “Is too hard work by half for me;
 I’ll start back home this very day
 And for a month at home I’ll stay
 And rest my eyes and sleep and eat
 And get down again on all four feet.”
 Said TEDDY-B, “Our journey’s through;
 There’s nothing left to see or do.
 We were treated well everywhere we went;
 And we have seen the President.
 And now for home, that’s what I say;
 But I mean to journey back this way
 To take a boat for London town
 To see the king and his golden crown.”
 The reporters called that afternoon
 When they heard the Bears were going so soon
 And begged a column at least of news
 About their trip and plans and views.
 TEDDY-B wrote out in boldest hand
 These lines that all can understand:

 “To the boys we say be always gay,
 And with jolly play fill every day.
 Be brave, be true, be square and white,
 And don’t forget to your friends to write.
 And to the girls: We’ve no advice;
 You’re everyone both sweet and nice.
 And to all the people whom we’ve met
 Please say we leave, with much regret,
 For our mountain cave and brook and tree.”

Signed [Illustration: Teddy B] and [Illustration: Teddy G]

             As their train pulled out an army band
         Played airs well known o’er all the land;
     And boys and girls waved their good-byes.
 And tears filled many children’s eyes.
 TEDDY-B called back to the crowd that he
 Would come East again each one to see.
 And TEDDY-G said he’d do his best
 To treat them well if they came out West.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

                      The Teddy Bears arrive home


[Illustration]

 As they crossed the country from East to West
         They stayed in their sleeping car to rest;
                 And but once or twice looked out to see
                         The towns passed through and country.
 Said TEDDY-G, “I’d like again
 To see that farm where we have been,
 And that country school and those boys at play,
 For that was our very jolliest day.”
 “What I wish most,” said TEDDY-B,
 “Is when we get off this train that we
 Shall have those horses to carry our load
 Back over the hills on the mountain road.”

 The horses were there with saddle and rein
 And met the Bears at the railway train,
 And six mountain goats like baggage men
 Were there to help them to the glen.
 As back they traveled that mountain road,
 The goats heaped high with the baggage load,
 And the Teddy Bears on broncho backs,
 Piled front and back with loaded sacks,
 They looked like bandits with their spoil,
 Or highwaymen after a day of toil,
 Or perhaps more like true knights of old
 Returning home with captured gold.
 As they approached the place where they were born
       TEDDY-G blew loud on a trumpet horn
           A West Point bugle call he knew,
               And a thousand friends came into view,
                     The Teddy Bears to greet with cheers
                           By this animal camp of mountaineers;

[Illustration:

  “_The Teddy Bears on Broncho backs piled front and back with loaded
    sacks._”
]

               For the news had scattered far and wide
                   When the Bears would reach the mountain side,
                       And the crowd had come from far and near
                           To welcome back two friends so dear.

 The old bobcat with the bandaged knee
 Was the first to shake with TEDDY-B,
 And a young cougar and a panther bold
 Helped TEDDY-G his load to hold,
                   And two big-horn sheep and a mountain deer
                   Stood up on stumps to lead each cheer,
                   And hundreds more gave welcome hand
                   To the most famous bears in all the land.

 They had gifts for each bought in the East
 And they passed them round at the evening feast,
 And then told stories for nights and days
 About their trip and the city ways,
                     And the fun they had and the tricks they played
                     And the things they saw and where they stayed,
                     And last and best, the time they spent
                     In Washington with the President.

[Illustration:

  “_They had gifts for each bought in the East, and they passed them
    round at the evening feast._”
]

 As the Bears turned in to their own home nest
         And curled up snug for the winter’s rest,
               Said TEDDY-G, as he fell asleep,
                     “If I should pray for things to keep
                             Of what I’ve seen either East or West,
                                   Its boys and girls I like the best.”

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        UNIFORM WITH THIS VOLUME
                                 IS THE
                First Book of the Roosevelt Bears Series

                                ENTITLED

                          Teddy B and Teddy G

                          THE ROOSEVELT BEARS
                      THEIR TRAVELS and ADVENTURES

                         Verse by SEYMOUR EATON

                   Illustrations by V. FLOYD CAMPBELL

             CONTAINS 180 PAGES. 16 FULL-PAGE COLOR PLATES
               AN ILLUSTRATION ON EVERY PAGE IN THE BOOK


[Illustration]

This book records in complete detail the wonderful trip of the Roosevelt
Bears from their cave in the Rocky Mountains to New York City. It tells
how these Bears entertained their animal friends at home, of the
exciting race to catch the Pullman train, the eventful night on the
sleeping car and the exciting adventures on the Kansas farm. Of the day
spent in rollicking fun at the district school, the adventures at the
county fair and the overnight trip in the balloon which took them from
Missouri to Chicago, where they landed in Lincoln Park and spent some
days in entertaining the children of that city, and seeing all the
points of interest, including the Athletic Club and a modern department
store.

Then to Niagara Falls to view the wonders of nature at that place, and
next to Boston, where they meet with a rousing reception and are
entertained at the home of Miss Priscilla Alden and her brother Will.
While in Boston they visit all the places of historical interest, such
as Bunker Hill, Plymouth Rock, Concord and Lexington. They have an
exciting scorch in an automobile, which causes their arrest and an
uncomfortable night in the Boston Jail. They receive honorary degrees at
Harvard University, and afterwards take a canoe trip down Boston Bay and
are swept out to sea by a storm and land on an iceberg, where they meet
a polar bear who has just come down from the northern seas on his
floating ship of ice. They are rescued from this place by a passing
steamer and carried to New York City, in which place they immediately
advertise for a guide to assist them in seeing the town.

Volume 1 closes with an interesting account of how they entertained the
children of New York City at the annual circus held in Madison Square
Garden, and which completes the account of the first half of the tour of
the United States by Teddy-B and Teddy-G, the Roosevelt Bears.

 These books can be procured from all book dealers in the United States
                    and Canada. =List Price, $1.50.=

           EDWARD STERN & CO., INC., PUBLISHERS, PHILADELPHIA

------------------------------------------------------------------------




             ANOTHER PUBLICATION, UNIFORM WITH THIS VOLUME

                              WILL BE THE

           Third Book of the Roosevelt Bears Series, Entitled


                                  THE
                         ROOSEVELT BEARS ABROAD


                         Verse by SEYMOUR EATON

                     Illustrations by R. K. CULVER


              This will be published on September 1, 1908

 PROFUSELY ILLUSTRATED WITH PEN DRAWINGS AND 16 FULL-PAGE COLOR PLATES

[Illustration:

  Copyright, 1907, by Seymour Eaton
]

After having rested for the winter in their home in the mountains of
Colorado, the Roosevelt Bears, now thoroughly used to the modern ways of
civilization, once more become restless, and having a strong desire to
see more of the world, start out upon their European tour. This book
will record in picture and in verse their trip across the Atlantic, the
tour through Ireland, Scotland and England, where they visit
Stratford-on-Avon, the home of Dickens, Oxford University, the Tower of
London, and meet King Edward, by whom they are entertained in royal
fashion. Then over to Paris and to Holland and Germany, where they
encounter Emperor William in the Black Forest From Germany they go to
Russia, where they take the Czar out for a carriage ride, and through
some mishap land in a dungeon cell. They next visit Switzerland and the
Alps, then down to Rome, Venice and Athens.

Feeling that their foreign tour would not be complete without a visit to
Egypt, they take a trip up the Nile and see the Pyramids and the Sphinx,
after which they start back for America, and are greeted upon landing at
the steamer pier in New York City by that famous gentleman known
throughout the world as “Uncle Sam.” This will undoubtedly be one of the
most interesting books of the Roosevelt Bears series.

These books can be procured from all book dealers in the United States
and Canada. =List Price, $1.50=.

           EDWARD STERN & CO., INC., PUBLISHERS, PHILADELPHIA

------------------------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration]

                            EDWARD STERN & CO.
                               INCORPORATED

 _Announce for the holiday season of 1908 the publication of a high-class
                         juvenile book, entitled_


                       THE CASTLE OF GRUMPY GROUCH


                                    BY
                          MARY DICKERSON DONAHEY

A fascinating story for children of all ages, with enough of the fairy
element to gratify the taste for the wonderful that is present in every
child. There is a very nice moral in the story, and its presentation is
made through the use of an idea which is entirely unique. The literary
quality of the book is excellent. Profusely illustrated with color
plates and pen drawings by

                          RUTH ELLIOTT NEWTON

Formal announcement of the date of publication of this story will be
made to the trade in ample season by the publishers.

                         EDWARD STERN & CO., INC.
                               PHILADELPHIA

 This book can be procured from all book dealers in the United States and
                                  Canada

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 2. Archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings retained as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 4. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MORE ABOUT TEDDY B. AND TEDDY G., THE ROOSEVELT BEARS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


